/*** Page =0= ***/
ORIGINAL RESEARCH 
published: 24 December 2015 
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00150 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
1 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 
Edited by: 
Nicolas Brunel, 
University of Chicago, USA 
Reviewed by: 
Egidio D’Angelo, 
University of Pavia, Italy 
Paul Dean, 
University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
*Correspondence: 
William Lennon 
william.c.lennon@gmail.com 
Received: 08 July 2015 
Accepted: 03 December 2015 
Published: 24 December 2015 
Citation: 
Lennon W, Yamazaki T and 
Hecht-Nielsen R (2015) A Model of In 
vitro Plasticity at the Parallel 
Fiber—Molecular Layer Interneuron 
Synapses. 
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 9:150. 
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00150 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the 
Parallel Fiber—Molecular Layer 
Interneuron Synapses 
William Lennon 1*, Tadashi Yamazaki 2 and Robert Hecht-Nielsen 1 
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA, 2 Graduate 
School of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications, Chofu, Japan 
Theoretical and computational models of the cerebellum typically focus on the role of 
parallel ﬁber (PF)—Purkinje cell (PKJ) synapses for learned behavior, but few emphasize 
the role of the molecular layer interneurons (MLIs)—the stellate and basket cells. A 
number of recent experimental results suggest the role of MLIs is more important than 
previous models put forth. We investigate learning at PF—MLI synapses and propose 
a mathematical model to describe plasticity at this synapse. We perform computer 
simulations with this form of learning using a spiking neuron model of the MLI and show 
that it reproduces six in vitro experimental results in addition to simulating four novel 
protocols. Further, we show how this plasticity model can predict the results of other 
experimental protocols that are not simulated. Finally, we hypothesize what the biological 
mechanisms are for changes in synaptic efﬁcacy that embody the phenomenological 
model proposed here. 
Keywords: molecular layer interneurons, parallel ﬁbers, plasticity, cerebellum, gated steepest descent 
INTRODUCTION 
The parallel ﬁber (PF)—Purkinje cell (PKJ) excitatory synapse has historically been considered 
the locus of learning and memory in the cerebellar cortex, driven by climbing ﬁber (CF) inputs 
(Grossberg, 1969; Marr, 1969; Albus, 1971; Ito et al., 2014). While the number of PF-PKJ synapses 
formed and capacity for information storage is massive (Brunel et al., 2004; Ito, 2006), excitatory 
inputs to PKJs alone do not account for decreases in PKJ activity observed during behavior 
(Miyashita and Nagao, 1984; Jirenhed et al., 2007) since PKJs ﬁre spontaneously in absence of 
excitatory inputs (Häusser and Clark, 1997; Cerminara and Rawson, 2004). The molecular layer 
interneurons (MLI)—stellate and basket cells—also receive PF inputs and provide feedforward 
inhibitory inputs to the PKJs in addition to the recurrent inhibitory inputs they form with other 
MLIs (Eccles et al., 1967; Palay and Chan-Palay, 1974). Learned changes to PF-MLI and MLI-PKJ 
synapses are postulated to increase the information capacity of the MLI-PKJ network and richness 
of PKJ output dynamics (Albus, 1971; Dean et al., 2010), however relatively little is known about 
plasticity at these synapses. 
There is mounting experimental evidence that MLIs play an important role in cerebellar 
function. Genetically modiﬁed mice lacking PKJ gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) receptors 
exhibit signiﬁcant motor learning deﬁcits (Wulﬀ et al., 2009), suggesting a signiﬁcant functional 
role for MLI feedforward inhibition in motor learning. Further, using optogenetics to selectively 
modulate the ﬁring rates of MLIs via photostimulation elicits movement and controls movement 
kinematics in awake mice (Heiney et al., 2014). Thus, orchestrated MLI activity is functionally 

/*** End Page =0= ***/
/*** Page =1= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
capable of controlling the gain and timing of movement 
components. Understanding the learned changes in MLI 
feedforward inhibition onto PKJs is crucial to understanding the 
learned output of the cerebellar cortex. 
Previous in vivo studies showing CF driven changes to 
the PF-MLI receptive ﬁelds (RF) led to the hypothesis that 
concomitant PF and CF activation strengthens PF-MLI synapses 
and PF stimulation alone weakens them (Jörntell and Ekerot, 
2002, 2003, 2011). Thus, this form of learning is said to be 
complementary and synergistic to PF-PKJ learning (Gao et al., 
2012), but the mechanisms governing these receptive ﬁeld 
changes are not understood. There is, however, a diverse body of 
in vitro experimental evidence where the mechanisms governing 
plasticity have been directly investigated and these results suggest 
that bidirectional changes in synaptic eﬃcacy can occur in 
absence of CF activity (Liu and Cull-Candy, 2000; Rancillac and 
Crépel, 2004; Smith and Otis, 2005; Sun and June Liu, 2007; Kelly 
et al., 2009). 
In this study, we propose a mathematical model of learning at 
PF-MLI synapses that is consistent with in vitro experimental 
ﬁndings. We choose to model plasticity at a single synapse 
based on the in vitro evidence since there is a larger and 
more diverse body of data that informs the model of the 
mechanisms involved. The model is developed with the in vivo 
evidence in mind and possible extensions to the model are 
proposed that could bridge the gap between synaptic and 
receptive ﬁeld changes. It is worth cautioning that in vitro 
results may not hold under in vivo conditions and the model 
should be considered carefully until validated in vivo. We 
perform computer simulations using this model of plasticity and 
spiking neuron models to reproduce six in vitro experimental 
results and simulate four novel protocols. Finally, we hypothesize 
what the biological mechanisms underlying this model are and 
interpret the experimental results in terms of the model and 
mechanisms. 
METHODS 
Neuron Model 
The MLI neuron model is similar to the neuron model we 
used in our previous simulations (Lennon et al., 2014) except 
that it excludes inhibitory synaptic conductances and includes 
excitatory synaptic conductances described below. Brieﬂy, the 
MLI is modeled as a conductance-based leaky integrate-and- 
ﬁre neuron model (Gerstner and Kistler, 2002) with α-Amino- 
3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N- 
Methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) conductances and an intrinsic 
depolarizing current which is drawn from a gamma distribution, 
Ispont(t) ∼ Ŵ(κ β) (in units nA), that causes the neuron 
to ﬁre spontaneously. When the membrane potential of the 
neuron reaches Vthreshold , the neuron emits a spike and an 
after-hyperpolarization conductance, gahp(t), is activated. gahp(t) 
is modeled according to Equation (2), where tspiked is the 
time the neuron last spiked and τahp is the conductance 
time constant. Actual parameters used are summarized in 
Table 1. 
TABLE 1 | Summary of simulation parameters. 
MLI neuron parameters 
Value 
Vthreshold (mV) 
-53.0 
C (pF) 
14.6 
¯gleak (nS) 
1.6 
Eleak (mV) 
-68.0 
¯gAMPA (nS) 
3.0 
Eexc (mV) 
0.0 
τfast (ms) 
0.8 
τslow (ms) 
18.0 
αfast 
0.8 
αslow 
0.2 
¯gNMDA (nS) 
1.0 
τrise (ms) 
3.0 
τdecay (ms) 
40.0 
τn (ms) 
10.0 
¯gAHP (nS) 
50.0 
EAHP (mV) 
-82.0 
τAHP (msec) 
2.5 
κ 
3.966333 
β 
0.006653 
MLI biophysical parameters (Midtgaard, 1992; Häusser and Clark, 1997; Carter and 
Regehr, 2002; Lachamp et al., 2009) AMPA receptor parameters (Carter and Regehr, 
2002; Satake et al., 2012); NMDA receptor parameters (Gabbiani et al., 1994); τn derived 
by hand to match (Carter and Regehr, 2002); κ , β from (Lennon et al., 2014). 
CdV 
dt −gleak(V(t) − Eleak) − gahp(t)(V(t) − Eahp) − (gAMPA(t) 
gNMDA(t))(V(t) − Eexc) Ispont(t) 
(1) 
gahp(t − tspiked) exp −(t − tspiked) 
τahp 
(2) 
Granule cells were not modeled directly and instead we simulated 
the arrival of PF spikes to PF-MLI synapses according to Poisson 
statistics with variable rate λ t which is controlled during 
simulations. 
Synaptic Conductances 
Model PF-MLI synapses contain both AMPA and NMDA 
receptor conductances. Total AMPA synaptic conductances are 
computed according to Equation (3), where ¯gsyn is the maximal 
synaptic conductance, wi is the synaptic weight, α(t) is the 
synaptic conductance kinetics function, and δi(t) is a Dirac delta 
function for the ith synapse onto the target neuron, indicating 
whether the pre-synaptic neuron has spiked at time t. We use 
the terms “synaptic weight,” “synaptic eﬃcacy,” and “synaptic 
strength” interchangeably. PF-MLI AMPAR conductance rise 
times are modeled as instantaneous increases whereas decay 
times are modeled as double exponentials to approximately ﬁt the 
prolonged conductances at these synapses (Carter and Regehr, 
2000; Equation 4). 
gAMPA (t) ¯gAMPA i 
wi 
t 
−∞ αAMPA(t − s)δi(s)ds (3) 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
2 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =1= ***/
/*** Page =2= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
TABLE 2 | Learning rule parameters. 
Neuron trace and weight 
update parameters 
MLI 
PF 
τψ (ms) 
60.0 
10.0 
νψ (ms) 
15.0 
2.0 
fmax(Hz) 
150 
300 
η 
0.001 
w0 
0.2 
αAMPA t αfast exp − t 
τfast 
αslow exp − t 
τslow (4) 
PF-MLI synaptic weights are modeled with a ﬁxed minimum 
value, w0 ∈ (0 1) and a variable component, wi ∈ [0 1] that 
changes according to the weight update equation described in 
the next section. Table 2 shows actual value of w0 used. Equation 
(5) ensures the eﬀective synaptic weight, wi, lies within the range 
[w0 1]. 
wi w0 (1−w0)ˆ 
wi 
(5) 
Voltage sensitive NMDAR conductances are modeled in 
accordance with Equations (6)–(8) which roughly capture the 
neurotransmitter availability in the synaptic cleft and the opening 
and closing kinetics of NMDA receptors, respectively. Where 
ρ (3.57 mM)−1 , [Mg2 ]o 1.2 mM is the extracellular 
magnesium concentration, and σ 
(−0.062 mV)−1 
(McCormick et al., 1993; Gabbiani et al., 1994). The logarithm of 
n t in Equation (7) is used for numerical stability. 
nt 
t 
−∞exp −t−s 
τn δsds 
(6) 
dR 
dt 
lognt 11−R 
τrise 
− R/τdecay (7) 
gNMDA t gNMDA R(1 ρ[Mg2 ]o eσ V)−1 
(8) 
Neuron Traces 
A trace of the neuron spiking activity is calculated every time 
step of the simulation and used to compute a smooth measure 
of the instantaneous neuron ﬁring rate that is normalized using a 
neuron speciﬁc maximum ﬁring rate, fmax (Table 2). If the actual 
ﬁring rate of the neuron exceeded fmax , the trace is truncated 
to fmax . This results in a unitless measure of the neuron ﬁring 
activity bounded by zero and one, i.e., xi t ∈ [0 1]. Throughout 
the paper we refer to this as the neuron “activity trace” or “ﬁring 
trace.” In several ﬁgures we plot the non-normalized “ﬁring rate 
trace” (in units Hz) as well. 
ψ(t): e 
−t 
τψ −e 
−t 
νψ 
τψ−νψ 
(9) 
xit 
1 
fmax 
t 
−∞ψt−sδisds 
(10) 
Synapse Learning Rule 
Synapses are updated according to the gated steepest descent 
learning rule (Chen, 2007). The weight update is correlative 
based on the activity of the pre-synaptic neuron, PFi t , and 
the diﬀerence between the post-synaptic activity, MLIj t , and 
a measure of the synaptic strength, wi j · η is the learning rate 
parameter, and γ is a free parameter that is adjusted during 
certain experiments, but is otherwise set to one. A biological 
interpretation of the learning rule can be found in the Discussion. 
dˆ 
wij 
dt ηPFit[MLIjt −γˆ 
wi j] 
(11) 
Software and Data Analysis 
Simulations were performed in Python using BRIAN simulator— 
a spiking neural network framework (Goodman and Brette, 
2009). All simulations are performed with a time step of 
0.25 ms using Euler’s method for integration of diﬀerential 
equations to ensure numerical stability. Data was analyzed 
and plotted using BRIAN Simulator, SciPy, Numpy, Matplotlib, 
Seaborn, and homemade software written in Python. Action 
potentials are drawn in plots by inserting a value of 0 mV in 
recordings of neuron model membrane potentials immediately 
after the model neuron reaches threshold. The source code 
for all experiments will be made freely available online upon 
publication. 
RESULTS 
Model of Synaptic Plasticity 
Plasticity at the PF-MLI synapses involves several mechanisms 
that produce both pre- and post-synaptic changes (Liu and 
Cull-Candy, 2000; Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Smith and Otis, 
2005; Soler-Llavina and Sabatini, 2006; Sun and June Liu, 2007; 
Bender et al., 2009; Kelly et al., 2009). Here, we present a 
phenomenological model of PF-MLI plasticity that is a function 
of PF and MLI activity and a measure of the synaptic eﬃcacy, w. 
While we mainly focus on evidence for post-synaptic plasticity, it 
is expected that this model also accounts for pre-synaptic changes 
in synaptic eﬃcacy in physiologically realistic conditions. Post- 
synaptic plasticity involves changes in the AMPA receptor 
phenotype composition (Liu and Cull-Candy, 2000, 2002; Liu 
and Savtchouk, 2012). Both LTP and LTD are observed and 
dependent on post-synaptic calcium signaling (Liu and Cull- 
Candy, 2000; Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Smith and Otis, 
2005). 
We hypothesize that activity-dependent post-synaptic Ca2 
transients induce changes in post-synaptic plasticity. These 
transients can induce both LTD and LTP, dependent on a 
dynamic cytosolic Ca2 threshold. We roughly capture the 
eﬀects of activity dependent calcium transients as unit-less 
traces of the pre- (PF t ) and post-synaptic activities (MLI t ), 
and the dynamic threshold as a variable synaptic strength, w, 
multiplied by a variable scaling factor γ . For the purpose of these 
simulations, γ 1 unless otherwise stated. η serves as a learning 
rate and is typically small, η 0.001. This learning rule is also 
known as gated steepest descent (Chen, 2007) and is similar to 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
3 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =2= ***/
/*** Page =3= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
the BCM learning rule (Bienenstock et al., 1982) and mechanistic 
models of calcium-dependent synaptic plasticity (Shouval et al., 
2002). 
dw 
dt ηPFt[MLIt−γw] 
(12) 
Due to w serving as a dynamic threshold for plasticity, this 
learning rule exhibits LTP when PF(t) > 0 and MLI(t) > γ w, 
and LTD when PF(t) > 0 and MLI(t) < γ w and is self-stabilizing 
so that synaptic weights do not “blow up.” The eﬀect of this 
learning rule can be seen as w “chasing” the value of MLI(t), when 
the pre-synaptic activity is non-zero, i.e., PF(t) > 0, and the pre- 
synaptic activity serves as a dynamic learning rate. The learning 
rule is Hebbian in the sense that it is the sum of a correlative term, 
PF(t)MLI(t), and a weight decay term, −γ PF(t)w, which can 
be seen by multiplying the pre-synaptic activity term through. 
The model of synaptic eﬃcacy implemented for the simulations 
described next has a ﬁxed component to simulate a minimal 
synaptic eﬃcacy and a variable component that is governed by 
Equation (12). 
Simulation of In vitro Experiments 
In this section, we present the results of computer simulations 
implementing this learning rule at PF-MLI synapses. The 
simulations consist of a single MLI spontaneously ﬁring at about 
30 Hz (simulating isolation from all inhibitory synaptic currents) 
with either a single PF or a bundle of 8 PFs forming synapses 
onto the MLI. Input spikes from PFs are modeled according to 
Poisson statistics with a variable rate which is controlled during 
the simulation. PF spikes produce both AMPA and NMDA 
conductances (described in Methods) in the MLI. In simulations 
I–IV, we simulate novel protocols to demonstrate the variety of 
synaptic weight changes depending on pre- and post-synaptic 
activities. In these simulations the simulated MLI receives only 
one PF input. In simulations V–X, we attempt to replicate 
the plasticity inducing protocols from a number of in vitro 
experiments and show that the simulations reproduce similar 
changes in synaptic eﬃcacy. Table 3 summarizes the simulation 
protocols and results. 
Simulation I: High-Frequency PF Bursts Induce LTP in 
Spontaneously Firing MLIs 
Simulation I investigates the eﬀects of PF burst stimulation 
on the ﬁring rate of a spontaneously ﬁring isolated MLI and 
the consequent changes to synaptic eﬃcacy. The simulation 
begins with a 5 s baseline period where the MLI and PF 
ﬁre spontaneously at their baseline rates of 30 and 0.33 Hz 
respectively (Figure 1). After 5 s, the PF is then stimulated to 
ﬁre approximately 100 Hz bursts (according to Poisson statistics) 
for 100 ms every 1 s. Each 1 s period starting after the baseline 
period constitutes one trial and 60 trials are simulated for a total 
simulation time of 65 s. The simulation is repeated independently 
10 times (n 10); Figure 1 shows the ﬁrst 10 s of an example of 
one simulation. A recording of the MLI voltage is shown in the 
top panel (red) and a non-normalized ﬁring rate trace is shown in 
the middle panel below (red). This ﬁring rate trace is divided by 
a maximum ﬁring rate parameter to normalize its value between 
[0,1] yielding MLI(t) which is used in the weight update equation 
(described in Methods). A non-normalized trace of the PF ﬁring 
rate is shown in the bottom panel (blue). The value of the synaptic 
strength, w, starts near its equilibrium value (where w ≈ MLI(t) 
when PF stimulation is low but non-zero) and is plotted in the 
bottom panel (green). PF bursts increase the MLI ﬁring rate 
above its baseline value. As the synaptic strength increases, we 
would expect a corresponding increase in the peak MLI ﬁring rate 
during PF activation across trials. This is not always reﬂected in 
the ﬁrst 10 s of the example simulation (e.g., Figure 1) since the 
PF burst is modeled as a Poisson spike train where the number 
and frequency of spikes varies slightly by trial. 
During periods where PF activity is non-zero and where the 
normalized MLI ﬁring activity (not shown) is greater than the 
variable weight component, w, the synapse strengthens. The PF 
activity serves two functions: ﬁrst to increase the MLI ﬁring 
rate, and second to gate plasticity. The trajectory of the synaptic 
weight across trials and averaged over independent simulations 
is shown in Figure 2. One important feature of this learning 
rule is that the synaptic weight asymptotes instead of “blowing 
up” and is thus stable compared to a purely Hebbian rule. The 
asymptote is the result of the synaptic weight catching up to the 
MLI activity—as it gets closer, the change in synaptic eﬃcacy is 
smaller. 
TABLE 3 | Summary of simulations. 
Simulation Simulation protocol 
Result Figure(s) 
I 
Single PF bursts at 100 Hz, isolated MLI ﬁres spontaneously at baseline. n 10 
LTP 
1,2 
II 
Single PF ﬁres continuously at 10 Hz with a depolarizing current injected into an isolated MLI. n 10 
LTP 
2, S1 
III 
Single PF ﬁres continuously at 10 Hz with a hyperpolarizing current injected into an isolated MLI. n 10 
LTD 
2, S2 
IV 
Single PF ﬁres continuously at 2 Hz, isolated MLI ﬁres spontaneously at baseline. n 10 
— 
2, S3 
V 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres at 50 Hz while the target MLI is voltage clamped to −60 mV. 
LTD 
3,5 
VI 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres 100 Hz bursts while the target MLI is current clamped to −80 mV. 
LTP 
4,5 
VII 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres at 1 Hz while the target MLI is current clamped to −80 mV. 
LTD 
5, S4 
VIII 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres at 2 Hz while the target MLI is injected with a depolarizing current. 
LTP 
5, S5 
IX 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres at 1 Hz while the MLI ﬁres spontaneously and the weight update parameter γ is increased to γ 1.5. 
LTD 
5,S6 
X 
A bundle of 8 PFs ﬁres at 1 Hz while the MLI ﬁres spontaneously and the weight update parameter γ is decreased to γ 0.5. LTP 
5, S7 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
4 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =3= ***/
/*** Page =4= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
FIGURE 1 | Simulation I: PF-driven long term potentiation. An example of one simulation run with an isolated MLI ﬁring spontaneously (red traces; top panel: 
membrane potential; middle panel: ﬁring rate trace) which receives one PF input (blue trace the activity trace of a granule cell (GR) providing PF input). Only the ﬁrst 
10 s of the simulation are shown. The value of the synaptic strength, w, is shown in green in the lower panel and begins near its equilibrium value. During the ﬁrst 5 s 
both PF and MLI ﬁring at baseline at about 0.33 and 30 Hz, respectively. After 5 s, the PF ﬁres 100 Hz bursts for 100 ms every 1 s. Starting at 5 s, each 1 s interval is 
considered a trial. The increased PF ﬁring causes the MLI to increase its ﬁring rate; at the same time, the synaptic weight, w, increases to compensate for the 
difference between the normalized MLI ﬁring rate and the current value of w. 
Simulation II: Continuous 10 Hz PF Firing with Paired 
MLI Hyperpolarizing Current Injection Induces LTD 
Simulation II investigates the eﬀects of a continuous 10 Hz 
stimulation of the PF with a paired hyperpolarizing current 
injected into the MLI to reduce its ﬁring rate to approximately 
10 Hz. The simulation begins with a 2.5 s baseline period 
where both PF and MLI ﬁre spontaneously. Starting at 2.5 s, a 
hyperpolarizing current is injected into the MLI to reduce its 
ﬁring rate to 10 Hz. Beginning at 5 s, the PF is continuously 
stimulated to ﬁre at approximately 10 Hz (according to 
Poisson statistics) for the remainder of the simulation, 60 s 
(Supplementary Figure 1, analogous to Figure 1). Thus, the 
total simulation time is 65 s and we again refer to the 1 s 
periods beginning at 5 s as trials. During this period, where non- 
zero PF activity gates plasticity, the synaptic weight decreases 
since the MLI activity is below the synaptic weight value 
(Figure 2). 
Simulation III: Continuous 10 Hz PF Firing with Paired 
MLI Depolarizing Current Injection Induces LTP 
Simulation III is identical to Simulation II except that a 
depolarizing current is injected into the MLI. Beginning at 2.5 s 
the MLI is injected with a constant depolarizing current suﬃcient 
to increase the MLI ﬁring rate to approximately 40 Hz. Beginning 
at 5 s, the PF is continuously stimulated to ﬁre at approximately 
10 Hz (according to Poisson statistics) for the remainder of the 
simulation, 60 s (Supplementary Figure 2). Because the PF ﬁring 
rate is non-zero and the MLI ﬁring rate increases above baseline, 
the synaptic weight increases (Figure 2). 
Simulation IV: Low-Frequency PF Stimulation with 
Spontaneous MLI Firing Results in Unremarkable 
Changes in Synaptic Efﬁcacy 
Simulation IV investigates the eﬀect of a constant low 
frequency stimulation of the PF (2 Hz) while the MLI ﬁres 
spontaneously at its baseline rate of 30 Hz. Similar to simulation 
I, a 5 s baseline period is simulated where the PF and 
MLI ﬁre at 0.33 Hz and 30 Hz, respectively. After 5 s, for 
another 60 s, the PF ﬁres at 2 Hz (according to Poisson 
statistics). Since this PF ﬁring rate does not suﬃciently 
change the MLI ﬁring rate and the weight value begins near 
equilibrium for baseline PF and MLI rates, the synaptic weight 
value does not change remarkably (Figure 2, Supplementary 
Figure 3). 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
5 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =4= ***/
/*** Page =5= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
FIGURE 2 | Summary of Simulations I–IV. The left panel shows the mean (solid lines) and range (shaded regions) percent change of synapse weight from starting 
values at the end of each trial across all simulated neurons (n 10) for a particular simulation. For simulation I where the PF is stimulated to ﬁre 100 Hz bursts for 
100 ms every 1 s (i.e., 1 s trials), the synapse weights reach an equilibrium value of about 20% greater than starting values. The right panel shows the ﬁnal mean (bar 
height) and range (black error bar) of weight values normalized to their starting values for each simulation. 
Simulation V: PF Bundle Stimulation at 50 Hz with 
Paired MLI Voltage Clamp Induces LTD 
Simulation V emulates the experimental conditions from Liu and 
Cull-Candy (2000) used to induce PF-MLI LTD. The simulation 
models a single isolated MLI with eight PF inputs to emulate the 
eﬀect of stimulating a bundle of PFs with an electrode in vitro. 
The simulation begins with a 2.5 s baseline period where the PFs 
and MLI ﬁre at baseline rates of 0.33 Hz and 30 Hz, respectively 
(Figure 3). At 2.5 s, the MLI is then voltage clamped to −60 mV. 
At 5 s, the PFs are stimulated to individually ﬁre at approximately 
50 Hz (according to Poisson statistics) which continues for 60 s. 
As before, each 1 s interval starting at 5 s is considered a trial 
to allow comparison among simulations. Concomitant with the 
activation of PFs, the synaptic weights decrease since the MLI 
ﬁring activity is eﬀectively zero, below the value of the synapse 
weight. Figure 3 depicts these changes, where ﬁgure conventions 
are the same as before except that the weight trace is the mean 
weight of all PF synapses impinging on the MLI and only one 
example PF trace is shown. The trajectory of the mean and range 
of synaptic weights onto this MLI is summarized in Figure 5. 
The synaptic weight asymptotically decreases to the minimum 
weight value, w0. The synaptic weight decrease in the simulation 
is consistent with the observed decrease in synaptic eﬃcacy by 
Liu and Cull-Candy (2000). 
Simulation VI: PF Bundle Burst Stimulation with 
Paired MLI Current Clamp Induces LTP 
Simulation VI models the experimental protocol used by Smith 
and Otis (2005) to induce PF-driven LTP at PF-MLI synapses. 
A single isolated, spontaneously ﬁring MLI receiving eight PF 
inputs is simulated. The simulation begins with the MLI and 
PFs ﬁring at their baseline rates of 30 and 0.33 Hz, respectively 
(Figure 4). After 2.5 s, a constant current is injected into the MLI 
to hold it near −80 mV. Beginning at 5 s, each PF is stimulated 
to ﬁre at 100 Hz (according to Poisson statistics) for 100 ms 
every 1 s and continues for 60 s. Despite being injected with a 
hyperpolarizing current, the cumulative PF input is suﬃcient to 
cause the MLI to depolarize and ﬁre action potentials, raising the 
MLI activity trace from near zero to above the original weight 
equilibrium values when both PF and MLI ﬁre spontaneously. 
Thus, the synaptic weights increase during these periods of PF 
activity and results in a cumulative LTP (Figure 5). Although not 
apparent in Figure 4, the peak ﬁring rates of MLIs increase along 
with synaptic weight increases (Supplementary Figure 8). 
Simulation VII: PF Bundle Low-Frequency Stimulation 
with Paired MLI Current Clamp Induces LTD 
Simulation VII models a diﬀerent experimental protocol used 
by Smith and Otis (2005) which was shown to induce PF-MLI 
LTD. The simulation protocol is identical to the one described 
for simulation VI except that each PF is stimulated to produce 
2 Hz ﬁring continuously (Supplementary Figure 4) beginning at 
5 s. The low frequency spike inputs from all 8 simulated PFs 
is insuﬃcient to regularly depolarize the MLI. Thus, the MLI 
activity trace remains zero while the PF activity trace is brieﬂy 
greater than zero for short periods of time. The cumulative eﬀect 
is a decrease in the mean PF-MLI synaptic strength, i.e., LTD 
(Figure 5). 
Simulation VIII: PF Bundle Low-Frequency 
Stimulation with Paired MLI Depolarizing Current 
Injection Induces LTP 
Simulation VIII models one of the experimental protocols 
used by Rancillac and Crépel (2004) which results in PF-MLI 
LTP. The protocol consists of an induction period of low- 
frequency (0.33 Hz) stimulation of the PF bundle for 8 min while 
simultaneously holding the MLI in voltage clamp at −60 mV. 
After the induction period, the PFs are stimulated to ﬁre at 2 Hz 
while the MLI is depolarized to 0 mV for 60 s. We hypothesized 
that during this induction period the synaptic eﬃcacy would 
decrease from its previous equilibrium value since the PF is 
somewhat active and the MLI is in voltage clamp. To investigate 
this in the simulation, we begin the simulation with the MLI in 
voltage clamp at −60 mV and the synaptic weight at a lower value 
than previous experiments. The MLI is held in voltage clamp for 
the ﬁrst 5 s of the simulation while the PFs ﬁre spontaneously 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
6 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =5= ***/
/*** Page =6= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
FIGURE 3 | Simulation V: Voltage clamping MLI induces PF-MLI LTD. An isolated MLI ﬁres spontaneously for the ﬁrst 2.5 s of the simulation and is then voltage 
clamped to −60 mV for the remainder of the simulation. Starting at 5 s, each PF in the bundle ﬁres at 50 Hz. Figure conventions are the same as Figure 1 except that 
the mean synaptic weight value across all PF synapses converging onto this MLI is shown (green) and only one sample PF trace is shown (blue). Between 2.5 and 5 s, 
the synaptic weights do not change signiﬁcantly since the PFs are ﬁring at a low 0.33 Hz. However, once the PFs begin ﬁring at 50 Hz, the synaptic weight decreases 
rapidly since the normalized value of MLI ﬁring is effectively 0 and below the synaptic weight value. This simulation attempts to reproduce the experimental results of 
Liu and Cull-Candy (2000). 
around 0.33 Hz (Supplementary Figure 5). After 5 s, the MLI is 
injected with current to ﬁre at 50 Hz. Since holding the simulated 
MLI at 0 mV would not result in spiking and thus a zero value 
for the activity trace, we chose to inject current to depolarize the 
neuron to ﬁre at 50 Hz and produce a non-zero activity trace as 
a surrogate. The result of the simulated protocol is that the MLI 
activity trace value is greater than the synaptic weight and thus a 
strengthening of the synapse occurs (Figure 5). This is consistent 
with the result of Rancillac and Crépel (2004). 
Simulations IX and X: Simulating Changes in “Basal 
Tone” Induces Bidirectional Changes in Synaptic 
Efﬁcacy 
Metabotropic 1 glutamate receptors (mGluR1) and gamma- 
aminobutyric acid B receptors (GABABR) found in MLIs are 
tonically active and their level of activity sets the “basal tone” for 
PF-MLI EPSC amplitude in vitro (Kelly et al., 2009). Simulations 
IX and X reproduce the eﬀects of modulating the activity of 
these metabotropic receptors in vitro using chemical agonists 
and antagonists by modifying γ in the synaptic weight update 
rule. By increasing γ , the MLI activity level needed to surpass 
the γ w threshold for LTP is increased. Thus, if w begins near 
its equilibrium value for baseline PF and MLI activity and γ 
is increased, w will decrease to reach a new equilibrium. In 
Simulation IX, 8 PFs connected to a MLI all ﬁre spontaneously at 
baseline rates of 0.33 Hz and 30 Hz, respectively, and the synaptic 
weights begin near their equilibrium values (Supplementary 
Figure 6). Starting a 5 s, and continuing for 10 min, γ is raised 
from γ 1.0 to γ 1.5. The result is a gradual decay in 
the synaptic weight (Figure 5) which is consistent with observed 
LTD when applying mGluR1 and GABABR agonists in vitro 
(Kelly et al., 2009). Conversely, in Simulation X, by decreasing γ 
from γ 1.0 to γ 0.5w increases to reach a new equilibrium, 
reproducing the eﬀects of applying chemical antagonists of 
applying mGluR1 and GABABR antagonists in vitro (Kelly et al., 
2009) (Supplementary Figure 7). 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we present a mathematical model of plasticity 
at PF-MLI synapses that describes bidirectional changes in 
synaptic eﬃcacy as observed in vitro. The current model 
depends only on the pre- and post-synaptic neuronal activity 
and a dynamic threshold partly determined by a measure of 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
7 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =6= ***/
/*** Page =7= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
FIGURE 4 | Simulation VI: Current clamping MLI with PF bursting results in LTP. An isolated MLI ﬁres spontaneously for the ﬁrst 2.5 s of the simulation and is 
then injected with a constant current to keep the membrane potential near −80 mV for the remainder of the simulation. Starting at 5 s, each PF in the bundle ﬁres 
100 Hz bursts for 100 ms every 1 s. Figure conventions are the same as Figure 3. Synchronous PF burst ﬁring is sufﬁcient to depolarize the MLI and cause it to ﬁre. 
During periods where the PFs are active, the MLI ﬁring rate trace rises above the value of the synaptic weight and thus results in an increase in the synaptic weight, 
i.e., LTP. This simulation attempts to reproduce the experimental results of Smith and Otis (2005). 
synaptic eﬃcacy. The dynamic threshold enables bidirectional 
changes in eﬃcacy and is inherently self-stabilizing. We show 
via computer simulations that the model reproduces similar 
changes in synaptic eﬃcacy as observed in a variety experimental 
results. In addition, we simulate novel protocols which serve as 
predictions to be validated by future experimental investigation. 
Biological Mechanisms of the Model 
The model presented in this study is a phenomenological 
description of plasticity that is a function of PF and MLI spiking 
activity and a measure of synaptic eﬃcacy. This model serves as 
a high-level surrogate for describing plasticity until the detailed 
biological mechanisms are modeled directly. In this section, we 
speculate on what the underlying mechanisms are which give rise 
to this phenomenological description. 
Plasticity at the PF-MLI synapses involves several mechanisms 
that produce both pre- and post-synaptic changes (Liu and Cull- 
Candy, 2000; Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Bender et al., 2009). 
While we mainly focus on evidence for post-synaptic plasticity, it 
is expected that this model also accounts for pre-synaptic changes 
in synaptic eﬃcacy in physiologically realistic conditions. Post- 
synaptic PF-MLI plasticity involves changes in the AMPA 
receptor (AMPAR) phenotype composition (Liu and Cull- 
Candy, 2000). Stellate-type MLIs, and presumably basket-type 
MLIs, express glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2) lacking calcium- 
permeable AMPARs (CP-AMPARS) and GluR2-containing 
calcium-impermeable AMPARs (CI-AMPAR) and have been 
shown to make an activity dependent switch from CP- to CI- 
AMPARs (Liu and Cull-Candy, 2000, 2002; Kelly et al., 2009). 
CP-AMPARs admit more charge at negative potentials (Liu 
and Cull-Candy, 2000) so a switch from CP- to CI-AMPARs 
results in a functional decrease in the strength of this synapse. 
Thus, the mixture of CP/CI-AMPARs at the post-synaptic 
density determines the excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSC) 
amplitude, or “basal tone,” of the synapse. Additionally, the level 
of tonic activation of mGluR1 and GABAB receptors inﬂuence 
the basal tone of the synapse (Kelly et al., 2009). Both activity 
dependent LTP and LTD at this synapse are observed and are 
post-synaptic calcium signaling dependent (Liu and Cull-Candy, 
2000; Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Smith and Otis, 2005; Sun and 
June Liu, 2007). 
We hypothesize that activity-dependent post-synaptic Ca2 
transients initiate changes in synaptic eﬃcacy. These transients 
could induce both LTD and LTP dependent on a dynamic 
cytosolic Ca2 threshold which could be reﬂected in the level 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
8 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =7= ***/
/*** Page =8= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
FIGURE 5 | Summary of Simulations V–X. Top panel depicts the mean 
(solid lines) and range (shaded) percent weight change of synaptic weights 
converging onto the MLI at the end of each trial for simulations V–VIII. Middle 
panel shows the mean (solid lines) and range (shaded) percent weight change 
of synaptic weights converging onto the MLI at the end of each minute of 
simulation time for simulations IX and X. The bottom panel compares the ﬁnal 
mean normalized synaptic weights at the end of the simulation for each 
simulation (bar height) and range of values (black error bars). 
of intracellular calcium stores. In the model proposed here, the 
dynamic threshold is captured by γ w, where w captures the 
strength of the synapse in terms of CP- and CI-AMPAR makeup, 
and γ captures the eﬀects of basal activity levels of metabotropic 
receptors involved in AMPAR phenotype composition. CP- 
AMPARs are one source of calcium inﬂux. Indeed, the change in 
AMPAR phenotype composition could provide one mechanism 
for governing bidirectional changes in plasticity. The upper 
limit on synaptic eﬃcacy could be governed by the dependence 
on suﬃcient amounts of calcium inﬂux simply to maintain 
the phenotype composition of the synapse since stronger 
synapses may require increasingly greater post-synaptic calcium 
concentrations simply to maintain or increase the strength of the 
synapse during periods of PF activation. This limit may be further 
enhanced by partial block of calcium inﬂux through CP-AMPARs 
during physiologic activation due to intracellular polyamines 
(Bats et al., 2013). The lower limit on synaptic eﬃcacy could be 
governed by the dependence of the CP- to CI-AMPAR switch on 
calcium inﬂux through CP-AMPARs (Liu and Cull-Candy, 2000, 
2005; Gardner et al., 2005). 
NMDARs are another source of calcium inﬂux for signaling 
changes in plasticity which are MLI activity dependent. Indeed, 
blocking NMDARs prevents LTP and even uncovers some LTD 
during PF stimulation in vitro (Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Smith 
and Otis, 2005). MLI NMDARs are located extrasynaptically 
(Clark and Cull-Candy, 2002) and can be activated by a single 
PF ﬁring at a suﬃciently high frequency (Nahir and Jahr, 2013). 
Since PFs ﬁre high-frequency bursts in physiologically realistic 
conditions (Chadderton et al., 2004; van Beugen et al., 2013), PFs 
likely activity NMDARs in vivo when ﬁring bursts. Furthermore, 
climbing ﬁbers (CFs) activate MLIs exclusively via glutamate 
spillover (Szapiro and Barbour, 2007) and CF mediated EPSCs 
have a signiﬁcant NMDAR-mediated component (Coddington 
et al., 2013). Thus, CFs may play a special role in gating calcium 
inﬂux and biasing plasticity toward LTP in vivo. This is consistent 
with adaptive ﬁlter models of cerebellar learning which require 
correlated PF and CF ﬁring to induce LTP at these synapses 
(Dean et al., 2010). 
The proposed model is also a function of PF and MLI activity 
which is a normalized, unit-less trace of the spiking activity of 
these neurons. Calcium signals could be the common mechanism 
of conveying this activity. MLI somatic calcium concentrations 
change slowly as a function of the ﬁring rate of these neurons 
(Franconville et al., 2011) and dendritic calcium concentrations 
are regulated by somatic spikes (Myoga et al., 2009). Thus, the 
ﬁring rate of MLIs could produce a global time-varying calcium 
concentration in the dendrites of MLIs. Similarly, PF traces could 
be implemented using calcium signals since physiological PF 
ﬁring results in prolonged glutamate conductances, and thus 
calcium inﬂux, at MLI synapses (Carter and Regehr, 2000). 
Furthermore, changes in PF-MLI synapses are input-speciﬁc due 
to localized synaptic Ca2 signaling in MLI dendrites (Soler- 
Llavina and Sabatini, 2006). Thus, a synapse speciﬁc trace of PF 
activity may use a sustained level of glutamate at the synapse and 
local calcium concentrations in the post-synaptic membrane. 
Limitations of the Model 
The model is limited to describing plasticity at the level 
of pre- and post-synaptic activities and is thus unable to 
simulate certain physiological conditions from past experimental 
protocols. In particular, calcium currents from AMPARs and 
NMDARs are not directly accounted for in this model and their 
inﬂuence is based on their collective ability to depolarize the 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
9 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =8= ***/
/*** Page =9= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
MLI. This makes simulating chemical NMDA channel block 
and voltage-dependent calcium conductances, such as holding 
the MLI in voltage clamp at 0 mV, (as in Simulation VIII) 
impossible. In addition, the eﬀect of modulating metabotropic 
receptor activities and their downstream eﬀects cannot be 
modeled directly. The model is also unrealistic in that changes 
in synaptic eﬃcacy happen instantaneously whereas changes 
in vitro and in vivo continue to take place for several minutes 
after stimulation (Rancillac and Crépel, 2004; Smith and Otis, 
2005). 
Related Models of Plasticity 
BCM theory (Bienenstock et al., 1982) is a model of plasticity 
used to describe activity dependent synaptic changes in the 
visual cortex which also employs a dynamic threshold to induce 
bidirectional changes in synaptic eﬃcacy. Using the BCM model 
in lieu of the gated steepest descent model would not reproduce 
all of the experimental results described here. This can be seen 
using Simulation V as an example. Using a trace of MLI spiking 
for the post-synaptic activity in the BCM weight update equation 
would result in no weight change when the MLI is held in current 
clamp since this trace is eﬀectively zero and all other terms of the 
weight update equation are multiplied by this term. 
A number of other models of cerebellar learning have either 
explicitly or implicitly modeled learning at PF-MLI synapses, but 
most of these models were proposed before any experimental 
evidence describing plasticity at this synapse existed. Kenyon 
(1997) proposed a model where changes in PF-PKJ synapses are 
consolidated into long-term memories at PF-MLI synapses, but 
the weight update equation used doesn’t appear to be consistent 
with experimental evidence. Albus (1971) also predicted learned 
changes to PF-MLI synapses but suggested that CF inputs act to 
weaken PF-MLI synapses, similar to PF-PKJ synapses. Adaptive 
ﬁlter models of cerebellar learning have been proposed that use 
positive and negative values for adaptive weights which implicitly 
deﬁnes plasticity at MLI synapses that is complementary and 
synergistic to PF-PKJ learning (Dean et al., 2010). 
Finally, a modiﬁed gated steepest descent learning rule has 
also been used to model plasticity at the synapses formed by 
mossy ﬁbers onto neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei/vestibular 
(Yamazaki et al., 2015, Supplementary Information, Equation 9). 
Simulations using this model reproduce post-training memory 
consolidation in learned gain changes of the optokinetic 
response. 
Extending the Model 
Concomitant PF and climbing ﬁber (CF) activation leads to 
a drastic increase in the PF-MLI receptive ﬁeld (RF) and 
subsequent PF stimulation alone leads to a decrease in the PF- 
MLI RF (Jörntell and Ekerot, 2002, 2003, 2011). The increased RF 
could be due to activation of electrically silent synapses, however 
the mechanisms governing this process are not understood. 
Assuming this in vitro model holds under in vivo conditions, 
one way to augment the current model is to include a separate 
equation for plasticity at electrically silent synapses that requires 
concomitant activation of PF and CF input in order for a synapse 
to become electrically active. In simulations, this would result in 
an increase in the number of synapses that depolarize the target 
MLI and an eﬀective increase in the RF size. 
CFs may also inﬂuence plasticity at active synapses in two 
ways: indirectly, by increasing MLI ﬁring rates thus favoring 
LTP, and directly, by modulating the threshold for plasticity 
through γ —capturing the eﬀects of glutamate spillover and 
changes in post-synaptic calcium concentration due to activation 
of NMDARs and CP-AMPARs. Note that this would be a separate 
mechanism than modulating metabotropic receptors to modulate 
γ . This could be implemented where γ is a function of the 
activity of CFs or the spillover of glutamate from CF inputs 
to the MLI. When CFs are inactive (active) or the volume of 
glutamate spillover is low (high), γ would be high (low). This 
mechanism would bias PF-MLI synapses with concomitant PF 
and CF activation toward potentiation by lowering the threshold 
in favor of LTP. Subsequently, if the PF were active without 
concomitant CF activation, the synapse might weaken since γ 
and thus γ w is higher than before. This could be one mechanism 
for observing decreases in PF receptive ﬁeld sizes with PF 
stimulation subsequent to a PF+CF protocol which results in PF 
receptive ﬁeld increases (Jörntell and Ekerot, 2002). Homeostatic 
plasticity (Turrigiano, 2012) such as synaptic scaling may be 
another mechanism that reduces receptive ﬁeld sizes over time 
or causes electrically active synapses to become inactive. Taken 
together, we predict that the extended model would reproduce 
the RF changes observed in the in vivo experiments performed 
by Jorntell and Ekerot. 
The model can also be extended to model calcium 
concentrations directly. Similar models based on BCM theory 
(Bienenstock et al., 1982) have been extended to model plasticity 
as a function of calcium concentrations which include inﬂuences 
from both AMPARs, NMDARs and action potentials (Shouval 
et al., 2002; Yeung et al., 2004). Indeed, the form of the equations 
governing plasticity as a function of calcium concentrations in 
these models is similar to the model presented here. The model 
presented in Shouval et al. (2002) could be modiﬁed in the 
following ways to capture synaptic plasticity at PF-MLI synapses. 
The calcium inﬂux would be a function of the proportion of 
CP-AMPARs which changes with the synaptic strength as well 
as a function of spillover glutamate from high frequency PF 
bursts and CF volumergic transmission separately. In addition, 
the glutamate binding dynamics from PFs would be modeled 
which results in prolonged calcium inﬂux. “Assumption 3” of 
Shouval et al. (2002) is similar to the slowly changing calcium 
concentrations in MLIs due to spiking activity (Myoga et al., 
2009; Franconville et al., 2011). The model would have to be 
further augmented to capture the eﬀect of metabotropic receptors 
on plasticity. A simulation of the described model should reﬂect 
predictions made by our model, but with more physiological 
detail and will allow for more direct simulation of NMDA 
channel block and voltage-dependent calcium currents under 
voltage-clamp conditions. 
Implications of the Model 
Historically, network models of the cerebellum have focused on 
PF-PKJ synapses as the locus of learning and memory in the 
cerebellar cortex. However, eﬀective cerebellar learning is likely 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
10 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =9= ***/
/*** Page =10= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
the result of distributed plasticity across synapse types in the 
cerebellum (Gao et al., 2012; Mapelli et al., 2015). MLI synapses 
have been previously suggested as one such location (Jörntell 
et al., 2010; D’Angelo, 2014). 
The learning rule for PF-MLI synapses presented here takes 
the form of Grossberg’s outstar learning rule (Grossberg, 1968). 
In accordance with this learning rule, granule cells (GRs) will 
“sample” the responses of their MLI targets and adjust their 
synaptic weights to “track” the normalized MLI activity values 
when PF synapses are active. If a distributed pattern of activity 
across the MLI population is repeatedly present concomitant 
with a GR encoded pattern of some stimulus, the PFs will adapt 
their weights so that the GR activity pattern alone will reproduce 
the MLI activity pattern. Thus, it may be the role of the CF 
inputs to the MLIs to act as a supervised learning signal and to 
initialize the distributed pattern of activity across the MLIs and 
to bias synaptic changes toward strengthening. Subsequently, the 
PF-MLI response will be learned and reproduced associatively. 
The role of MLI-MLI plasticity may be to normalize 
and contrast enhance the MLI population response and to 
induce competition among MLIs in the distributed pattern of 
activity across the local MLI population. Furthermore, MLI-PKJ 
plasticity would enable learning combinations of MLI activity 
patterns to produce appropriate PKJ responses. Finally, PF-PKJ 
plasticity may act synergistically with changes in feedforward 
inhibition from MLIs, although the two inputs could have 
diﬀerent time courses for aﬀecting PKJ responses. Extending the 
model to account for the interplay between CFs and PF-MLI 
plasticity may be necessary before network simulations of the 
cerebellum using this model of plasticity would be illuminating. 
Interpretation of Experimental Results 
A number of in vitro experimental protocols used to induce 
plasticity at PF-MLI synapses can be described in terms of the 
model presented in this study which also correctly predicts 
the experimental results. We present this interpretation and 
speculate on some of the biological mechanisms responsible for 
plasticity in each case. Table 4 summarizes selected experiments 
and their interpretations in terms of this model. 
Early on, it was shown that high frequency stimulation of PFs 
while holding the MLI in voltage clamp at −60 mV induces a 
switch from CP- to CI-AMPARs (Liu and Cull-Candy, 2000), 
i.e., LTD. This result is predicted by the model since holding the 
MLI in voltage clamp decreases its activity relative to baseline 
(↓ MLI(t)), and stimulating PFs increases their activity relative 
to baseline (↑ PF(t)); i.e., w ∝↑ PF(t) ↓ MLI(t) − γ w < 0 
where MLI(t) < γ w. Chelating post-synaptic Ca2 prevented 
the switch in AMPAR phenotype and resulted in no change in 
synaptic eﬃcacy, supporting the idea that the mechanism of 
plasticity is calcium signaling dependent. Similarly, a separate 
study showed that a 30 Hz PF stimulation with the MLI held in 
voltage clamp leads to pre-synaptic LTD that is also dependent 
on post-synaptic Ca2 inﬂux (Soler-Llavina and Sabatini, 2006), 
suggesting a complementary form of LTD. While this is a 
diﬀerent mechanism, it is consistent with the model prediction 
by the same reasoning. 
In somewhat more realistic physiological conditions, high 
frequency PF burst stimulation was shown to induce LTP in vitro 
(Smith and Otis, 2005). This was demonstrated in two ways. In 
the ﬁrst method, MLIs were held in current clamp at −80 mV 
while PFs were stimulated to ﬁre brief high frequency bursts 
at 100 Hz. The bath contained picrotoxin to block inhibitory 
currents into the MLI. Following the plasticity protocol, LTP 
was measured directly by observing an increase in MLI spike 
ﬁring in response to PF input compared to control conditions. 
In the second method, synaptic changes were induced indirectly 
by stimulating the PFs according to the same protocol but in a 
bath without picrotoxin and then recording responses from PKJs. 
After the protocol, PKJs initially had a higher ﬁring rate due to 
PF-PKJ LTP, followed by a period of spike depression caused 
by inhibition, presumably from increased MLI feedforward 
inhibition. Additional experimental evidence suggests increased 
depression appears to be due to PF-MLI potentiation and not 
from MLI-PKJ potentiation. The model predicts LTP in these 
experiments by w ∝↑ PF(t) ↑ MLI(t) − γ w > 0 with 
MLI(t) > γ w since the membrane potential of the MLI is able to 
ﬂuctuate during PF stimulation in contrast to the protocol used 
in Liu and Cull-Candy (2000) where it is voltage clamped. Using 
the same LTP-inducing protocol in the presence of NMDAR 
antagonists, LTP is abolished and some LTD is uncovered (Smith 
and Otis, 2005). NMDARs are located extrasynaptically and 
can be activated by a high frequency train of PF stimulation 
(Carter and Regehr, 2000; Clark and Cull-Candy, 2002). This 
suggests the 100 Hz stimulation caused spillover activation of 
NMDARs and that this is important for LTP, presumably due 
to Ca2 inﬂux since chelating post-synaptic Ca2 also blocked 
LTP (Smith and Otis, 2005). Using a low frequency stimulation 
protocol consisting of PF stimulation at 1 Hz for 5 min, PF-MLI 
LTD is observed both directly and indirectly (Smith and Otis, 
2005). In the indirect case when the MLI is held in current 
clamp, the stimulus may be insuﬃcient to perturb the MLI 
membrane potential signiﬁcantly or to activate extrasynaptic 
NMDARs, thus the current clamp acts similar to voltage clamp 
as in previous experiments. The model also predicts LTD, i.e., 
w∝↑PF(t) ↓MLI(t)−γw <0. 
Sun and June Liu (2007) investigated the role of NMDARs 
in the CP- to CI-AMPAR switch. To induce this change, MLIs 
were held in voltage clamp at −60 mV while chemically blocking 
AMPARs; PFs were stimulated to produce high frequency 
bursts that activated NMDARs and were paired with fast, 1 ms, 
MLI depolarizations to 0 mV to release NMDAR Mg2 block. 
A Ca2 dependent CP- to CI-AMPAR switch was observed, 
suggesting that Ca2 entry through NMDARs provide an 
additional pathway to induce plasticity at the synapse. While 
Ca2 enters through NMDARs during the brief depolarization, 
it is insuﬃcient to signal LTP since the normal spiking activity 
of the MLI, and thus cytosolic calcium concentration, is reduced 
by voltage clamp. The model would reﬂect this as w ∝↑ 
PF(t) ↓MLI(t)−γw <0whereMLI(t)<γw. 
Rancillac and Crépel (2004) found that holding the MLI 
in voltage clamp at −60 mV and stimulating PFs at 2 Hz 
resulted in a mix of LTP and LTD at the PF-MLI synapse. 
One explanation for the mix of LTP/LTD may be the result 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
11 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =10= ***/
/*** Page =11= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
TABLE 4 | Summary of experimental results. 
Simulation 
References 
Experimental protocol 
Result 
Interpretation 
V 
Liu and 
Cull-Candy, 2000 
In vitro, MLI voltage clamped at −60 mV. 300 
PF stimuli delivered @ 50 Hz. Bicuculline, 
picrotoxin, D-APV5. 
LTD 
Holding the MLI in voltage clamp prevents its 
spontaneous activity and prevents inward Ca2 currents 
(↓MLI). PF stimulation at 50 Hz increases PF activity 
above baseline (↑PF). 
w = ↑PF(↓MLI-w) < 0 
VI 
Smith and Otis, 
2005 
In vitro, MLI current clamped at −80 mV. PFs 
stimulated (3–10 PFs) with 10 pulses at 100 Hz 
every 3 s for 5 min. Picrotoxin in bath. 
LTP 
Sufﬁcient PF stimulation (↑PF) increases MLI activity 
(↑MLI) since current clamp allows the membrane 
potential to ﬂuctuate. 
w ↑PF(↑MLI-w) > 0 
VII 
Smith and Otis, 
2005 
In vitro, MLI current clamped at −80 mV. PFs 
stimulated (3–10 PFs) with at 1 Hz for 5 min. 
Picrotoxin in bath. 
LTD 
Low frequency PF stimulation is a slight increase in PF 
activity (↑PF) but insufﬁcient to increase MLI activity 
which is held in current clamp (↓MLI) 
w ↑PF(↓MLI-w) < 0 
Similar to IV 
Rancillac and 
Crépel, 2004 
In vitro, MLI voltage clamp at −60 mV. 
Bicuculline in bath. Induction protocol of PF 
stimulation at 0.33 Hz for 8 min, then PF 
stimulated at 2 Hz for 60 s. 
LTP/-/LTD The induction protocol initially shifts ↓w to a new value 
w* since ↓MLI. The plasticity protocol then increases PF 
activity (↑PF). 
w ↑PF(MLI-w*) ≈ 0 
VIII 
Rancillac and 
Crépel, 2004 
In vitro, MLI voltage clamp at −60 mV. 
Bicuculline in bath. Induction protocol of PF 
stimulation at 0.33 Hz for 8 min, then PF 
stimulated at 2 Hz for 60 s with a paired MLI 
depolarization at 0 mV 
LTP/- 
The induction protocol initially shifts ↓w to a new value 
w* since ↓MLI. The plasticity protocol then increases PF 
activity (↑PF) and admits more Ca2 possibly via 
NMDARs and VGCCs (↑MLI). 
w ↑PF(↑MLI-w*) > 0 
— 
Sun and June Liu, 
2007 
In vitro, MLI held at −70 mV during stimulation 
followed by brief depolarization to 0 mV. GYKI 
in path (AMPAR blocker). PF 4 stimuli @ 50 Hz, 
100 sweeps. 
LTD 
High frequency PF bursts (↑PF) paired with brief MLI 
depolarization, leads to spillover activation of NMDARs 
and limited Ca2 inﬂux via NMDARs. Since CP-AMPARs 
are blocked and MLI spontaneous activity is prevented 
via voltage clamp, the overall Ca2 transient is below 
threshold (↓MLI). 
w ↑PF(↓MLI-w) < 0 
IX 
Kelly et al., 2009 
In vitro, MLI voltage clamped at −60 mV. 
D-APV5, bicuculline in bath. Either DHPG 
(mGluR1 agonist) or baclofen (GABABR 
agonist) added. 
LTD 
Increasing mGluR Group I activity (↑mGluR) can be 
interpreted as increasing PF activity (↑PF). Additionally, 
↑mGluR may directly increase the intracellular Ca2 
threshold required for plasticity (↑w). Increasing 
GABABR (↑GABABR) enhances mGluR activity, and a 
similar result holds. 
w ↑PF(MLI-↑w) < 0 
X 
Kelly et al., 2009 
In vitro, MLI voltage clamped at −60 mV. 
D-APV5, bicuculline in bath. Either LY367385 
(mGluR1 antagonist) or CGP62349 (GABABR 
antagonist) added. 
LTP 
Decreasing mGluR activity adjusts the “basal tone” by 
shifting the intracellular Ca2 threshold for plasticity 
(↓w). Ambient glutamate allows some Ca2 to still ﬂow 
into the MLI. Since GABABR enhances mGluR activity, 
↓GABABR causes ↓mGluR, thus ↓w. 
w PF(MLI-↓w) > 0 
of the induction protocol used which held the MLI in voltage 
clamp at −60 mV while stimulating the PFs at 0.33 Hz for 
several minutes; this could decrease the synaptic strength and/or 
the dynamic threshold down during this period. During the 
experiment, the MLI activity is compared to the threshold for 
synaptic plasticity—for some synapses, the low activation could 
be suﬃcient to surpass the threshold (MLI(t) > γ w) and 
not for others (MLI(t) < γ w). Thus, on average w ∝↑ 
PF(t) MLI(t) − γ w ≈ 0. In contrast, when repeating this 
stimulation and pairing it with MLI depolarization at 0 mV more 
cells underwent LTP, indicating that post-synaptic activity plays 
a role in plasticity, i.e., w ∝↑ PF(t) ↑ MLI(t) − γ w > 
0. This form of LTP was independent of cAMP but required 
NO production. In another experiment stimulating PFs at 8 Hz 
while holding the MLI in voltage clamp induced a mix of 
LTP or no change in tested synapses, but part of the LTP was 
cAMP dependent (Rancillac and Crépel, 2004). This last result 
in consistent with (Bender et al., 2009) which showed pre- 
synaptic LTP dependent on cAMP through a similar induction 
protocol. These results reveal the complexity of synaptic plasticity 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
12 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =11= ***/
/*** Page =12= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
at the PF-MLI synapse consisting of both pre- and post- 
synaptic mechanisms induced under artiﬁcial physiological 
conditions. 
Kelly et al. (2009) found that activation of both mGluRs 
and CP-AMPARs is necessary and suﬃcient to drive the CP- 
to CI-AMPAR subunit switch and that activation of GABABR 
enhances mGluR activity. Adding mGluR1 agonists to the in 
vitro preparation results in LTD at the synapse. A similar eﬀect 
is seen when adding GABABR agonists to the bath. Assuming 
metabotropic receptors act to directly modulate the post-synaptic 
cytosolic calcium threshold used for bidirectional changes 
in plasticity, the eﬀects of up-regulating these metabotropic 
receptor activities can be seen as increasing γ in the model, i.e., 
w ∝ PF(t) MLI(t)− ↑ γ w < 0. Similarly, adding mGluR1 
and GABABR antagonists results in LTP which can be interpreted 
as↓γ. 
CONCLUSION 
In summary, we have shown that a simple mathematical 
model of plasticity at PF-MLI synapses captures most reported 
phenomena of plasticity at this synapse. We carried out several 
numerical simulations of this plasticity rule implemented at PF- 
MLI synapses using a previously published leaky integrate-and- 
ﬁre model of MLIs. We showed that this model reproduces 
the experimental results of several plasticity inducing protocols 
reported in the literature. Additionally, we simulated several 
novel protocols that have not been published to serve as 
predictions for the model. Finally, we speculated on the 
biophysical mechanisms governing plasticity at this synapse and 
the implications of this form of plasticity on the network function 
of the cerebellar cortex. 
FUNDING 
The authors thank the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science 
(#SP13031) and the U.S. National Science Foundation (#OISE- 
1308822) for making this collaboration possible. WL and RH-N 
gratefully acknowledge funding from the U.S. Oﬃce of Naval 
Research (#N00014-12-1-0588). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Professor Nobito Yamamoto, 
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (#SP13031) 
and the U.S. National Science Foundation (#OISE-1308822) for 
making this collaboration possible. WL and RH-N gratefully 
acknowledge funding from the U.S. Oﬃce of Naval Research 
(#N00014-12-1-0588). WL would like to thank Drs. Kazuhiko 
Yamaguchi, Mehrdad Yazdani and Geoﬀrey Gamble for helpful 
discussions. 
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found 
online at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fncom. 
2015.00150 
REFERENCES 
Albus, J. S. (1971). A theory of cerebellar function. Math. Biosci. 10, 25–61. doi: 
10.1016/0025-5564(71)90051-4 
Bats, C., Farrant, M., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2013). A role of TARPs in 
the expression and plasticity of calcium-permeable AMPARs: evidence 
from cerebellar neurons and glia. Neuropharmacology 74, 76–85. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.03.037 
Bender, V. A., Pugh, J. R., and Jahr, C. E. (2009). Presynaptically expressed long- 
term potentiation increases multivesicular release at parallel ﬁber synapses. 
J. Neurosci. 29, 10974–10978. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2123-09.2009 
Bienenstock, E. L., Cooper, L. N., and Munro, P. W. (1982). Theory for 
the development of neuron selectivity: orientation speciﬁcity and binocular 
interaction in visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 2, 32–48. 
Brunel, N., Hakim, V., Isope, P., Nadal, J. P., and Barbour, B. (2004). Optimal 
information storage and the distribution of synaptic weights: perceptron 
versus Purkinje cell. Neuron 43, 745–757. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004. 
08.023 
Carter, A. G., and Regehr, W. G. (2000). Prolonged synaptic currents and glutamate 
spillover at the parallel ﬁber to stellate cell synapse. J. Neurosci. 20, 4423–4434. 
Carter, A. G., and Regehr, W. G. (2002). Quantal events shape cerebellar 
interneuron ﬁring. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 1309–1318. doi: 10.1038/nn970 
Cerminara, N. L., and Rawson, J. A. (2004). Evidence that climbing ﬁbers 
control an intrinsic spike generator in cerebellar Purkinje cells. J. Neurosci. 24, 
4510–4517. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4530-03.2004 
Chadderton, P., Margrie, T. W., and Häusser, M. (2004). Integration of quanta in 
cerebellar granule cells during sensory processing. Nature 428, 856–860. doi: 
10.1038/nature02442 
Chen, Z. (2007). Correlative Learning: A Basis for Brain and Adaptive Systems. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience. 
Clark, B. A., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2002). Activity-dependent recruitment of 
extrasynaptic NMDA receptor activation at an AMPA receptor-only synapse. 
J. Neurosci. 22, 4428–4436. 
Coddington, L. T., Rudolph, S., Vande Lune, P., Overstreet-Wadiche, L., 
and Wadiche, J. I. (2013). Spillover-mediated feedforward inhibition 
functionally segregates interneuron activity. Neuron 78, 1050–1062. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2013.04.019 
D’Angelo, E. (2014). The organization of plasticity in the cerebellar cortex: from 
synapses to control. Prog. Brain Res. 210, 31–58. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444- 
63356-9.00002-9 
Dean, P., Porrill, J., Ekerot, C. F., and Jörntell, H. (2010). The cerebellar 
microcircuit as an adaptive ﬁlter: experimental and computational evidence. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 30–43. doi: 10.1038/nrn2756 
Eccles, J. C., Ito, M., and Szentaìgothai, J. N. (1967). The Cerebellum as a Neuronal 
Machine. Berlin, New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. 
Franconville, R., Revet, G., Astorga, G., Schwaller, B., and Llano, I. (2011). Somatic 
calcium level reports integrated spiking activity of cerebellar interneurons 
in vitro and in vivo. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1793–1805. doi: 10.1152/jn.00133.2011 
Gabbiani, F., Midtgaard, J., and Knöpfel, T. (1994). Synaptic integration in a model 
of cerebellar granule cells. J. Neurophysiol. 72, 999–1009. 
Gao, Z., van Beugen, B. J., and De Zeeuw, C. I. (2012). Distributed synergistic 
plasticity and cerebellar learning. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 619–635. doi: 
10.1038/nrn3312 
Gardner, S. M., Takamiya, K., Xia, J., Suh, J. G., Johnson, R., Yu, S., 
et al. (2005). Calcium-permeable AMPA receptor plasticity is mediated by 
subunit-speciﬁc interactions with PICK1 and NSF. Neuron 45, 903–915. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.026 
Gerstner, W., and Kistler, W. M. (2002). Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, 
Populations, Plasticity. Cambridge, UK; New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
13 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =12= ***/
/*** Page =13= ***/
Lennon et al. 
A Model of In vitro Plasticity at the PF-MLI Synapses 
Goodman, D. F., and Brette, R. (2009). The brian simulator. Front. Neurosci. 3, 
192–197. doi: 10.3389/neuro.01.026.2009 
Grossberg, S. (1968). Some nonlinear networks capable of learning a spatial 
pattern of arbitrary complexity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 59, 368–372. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.59.2.368 
Grossberg, S. (1969). On learning of spatiotemporal patterns by networks with 
ordered sensory and motor components. 1. Excitatory components of the 
cerebellum. Stud. Appl. Math. 48, 105–132. doi: 10.1002/sapm1969482105 
Häusser, M., and Clark, B. A. (1997). Tonic synaptic inhibition modulates neuronal 
output pattern and spatiotemporal synaptic integration. Neuron 19, 665–678. 
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80379-7 
Heiney, S. A., Kim, J., Augustine, G. J., and Medina, J. F. (2014). Precise control 
of movement kinematics by optogenetic inhibition of Purkinje cell activity. 
J. Neurosci. 34, 2321–2330. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4547-13.2014 
Ito, M. (2006). Cerebellar circuitry as a neuronal machine. Prog. Neurobiol. 78, 
272–303. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.02.006 
Ito, M., Yamaguchi, K., Nagao, S., and Yamazaki, T. (2014). Long-term depression 
as a model of cerebellar plasticity. Prog. Brain Res. 210, 1–30. doi: 10.1016/B978- 
0-444-63356-9.00001-7 
Jirenhed, D. A., Bengtsson, F., and Hesslow, G. (2007). Acquisition, extinction, and 
reacquisition of a cerebellar cortical memory trace. J. Neurosci. 27, 2493–2502. 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4202-06.2007 
Jörntell, H., Bengtsson, F., Schonewille, M., and De Zeeuw, C. I. (2010). Cerebellar 
molecular layer interneurons - computational properties and roles in learning. 
Trends Neurosci. 33, 524–532. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2010.08.004 
Jörntell, H., and Ekerot, C. F. (2002). Reciprocal bidirectional plasticity of parallel 
ﬁber receptive ﬁelds in cerebellar Purkinje cells and their aﬀerent interneurons. 
Neuron 34, 797–806. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00713-4 
Jörntell, H., and Ekerot, C. F. (2003). Receptive ﬁeld plasticity profoundly alters 
the cutaneous parallel ﬁber synaptic input to cerebellar interneurons in vivo. 
J. Neurosci. 23, 9620–9631. 
Jörntell, H., and Ekerot, C. F. (2011). Receptive ﬁeld remodeling induced by 
skin stimulation in cerebellar neurons in vivo. Front. Neural Circuits 5:3. doi: 
10.3389/fncir.2011.00003 
Kelly, L., Farrant, M., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2009). Synaptic mGluR activation 
drives plasticity of calcium-permeable AMPA receptors. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
593–601. doi: 10.1038/nn.2309 
Kenyon, G. T. (1997). A model of long-term memory storage in the 
cerebellar cortex: a possible role for plasticity at parallel ﬁber synapses onto 
stellate/basket interneurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 14200–14205. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.25.14200 
Lachamp, P. M., Liu, Y., and Liu, S. J. (2009). Glutamatergic modulation of 
cerebellar interneuron activity is mediated by an enhancement of GABA release 
and requires protein kinase A/RIM1alpha signaling. J. Neurosci. 29, 381–392. 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2354-08.2009 
Lennon, W., Hecht-Nielsen, R., and Yamazaki, T. (2014). A spiking network 
model of cerebellar Purkinje cells and molecular layer interneurons exhibiting 
irregular ﬁring. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 8:157. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00157 
Liu, S. J., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2002). Activity-dependent change in AMPA 
receptor properties in cerebellar stellate cells. J. Neurosci. 22, 3881–3889. 
Liu, S. J., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2005). Subunit interaction with PICK and GRIP 
controls Ca2 permeability of AMPARs at cerebellar synapses. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 
768–775. doi: 10.1038/nn1468 
Liu, S. J., and Savtchouk, I. (2012). Ca(2 ) permeable AMPA receptors switch 
allegiances: mechanisms and consequences. J. Physiol. 590, 13–20. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.2011.213926 
Liu, S. Q., and Cull-Candy, S. G. (2000). Synaptic activity at calcium-permeable 
AMPA receptors induces a switch in receptor subtype. Nature 405, 454–458. 
doi: 10.1038/35013064 
Mapelli, L., Pagani, M., Garrido, J. A., and D’Angelo, E. (2015). Integrated plasticity 
at inhibitory and excitatory synapses in the cerebellar circuit. Front. Cell. 
Neurosci. 9:169. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00169 
Marr, D. (1969). A theory of cerebellar cortex. J. Physiol. 202, 437–470. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.1969.sp008820 
McCormick, D. A., Wang, Z., and Huguenard, J. (1993). Neurotransmitter control 
of neocortical neuronal activity and excitability. Cereb. Cortex 3, 387–398. doi: 
10.1093/cercor/3.5.387 
Midtgaard, J. (1992). Membrane properties and synaptic responses of Golgi cells 
and stellate cells in the turtle cerebellum in vitro. J. Physiol. 457, 329–354. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019381 
Miyashita, Y., and Nagao, S. (1984). Contribution of cerebellar intracortical 
inhibition to Purkinje cell response during vestibulo-ocular reﬂex of alert 
rabbits. J. Physiol. 351, 251–262. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1984.sp015243 
Myoga, M. H., Beierlein, M., and Regehr, W. G. (2009). Somatic spikes regulate 
dendritic signaling in small neurons in the absence of backpropagating action 
potentials. J. Neurosci. 29, 7803–7814. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0030-09.2009 
Nahir, B., and Jahr, C. E. (2013). Activation of extrasynaptic NMDARs at individual 
parallel ﬁber-molecular layer interneuron synapses in cerebellum. J. Neurosci. 
33, 16323–16333. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1971-13.2013 
Palay, S. L., and Chan-Palay, V. (1974). Cerebellar Cortex: Cytology and 
Organization. Berlin; Heidelberg; New York, NY: Springer. 
Rancillac, A., and Crépel, F. (2004). Synapses between parallel ﬁbres and stellate 
cells express long-term changes in synaptic eﬃcacy in rat cerebellum. J. Physiol. 
554, 707–720. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2003.055871 
Satake, S., Inoue, T., and Imoto, K. (2012). Paired-pulse facilitation of 
multivesicular release and intersynaptic spillover of glutamate at rat 
cerebellar granule cell-interneurone synapses. J. Physiol. 590, 5653–5675. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.2012.234070 
Shouval, H. Z., Bear, M. F., and Cooper, L. N. (2002). A uniﬁed model of 
NMDA receptor-dependent bidirectional synaptic plasticity. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 99, 10831–10836. doi: 10.1073/pnas.152343099 
Smith, S. L., and Otis, T. S. (2005). Pattern-dependent, simultaneous plasticity 
diﬀerentially transforms the input-output relationship of a feedforward circuit. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 14901–14906. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0505028102 
Soler-Llavina, G. J., and Sabatini, B. L. (2006). Synapse-speciﬁc plasticity and 
compartmentalized signaling in cerebellar stellate cells. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 
798–806. doi: 10.1038/nn1698 
Sun, L., and June Liu, S. (2007). Activation of extrasynaptic NMDA 
receptors induces a PKC-dependent switch in AMPA receptor subtypes 
in mouse cerebellar stellate cells. J. Physiol. 583, 537–553. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.2007.136788 
Szapiro, G., and Barbour, B. (2007). Multiple climbing ﬁbers signal to molecular 
layer interneurons exclusively via glutamate spillover. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 
735–742. doi: 10.1038/nn1907 
Turrigiano, G. (2012). Homeostatic synaptic plasticity: local and global 
mechanisms for stabilizing neuronal function. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 
4:a005736. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a005736 
van Beugen, B. J., Gao, Z., Boele, H. J., Hoebeek, F., and De Zeeuw, C. I. (2013). 
High frequency burst ﬁring of granule cells ensures transmission at the parallel 
ﬁber to purkinje cell synapse at the cost of temporal coding. Front. Neural 
Circuits 7:95. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00095 
Wulﬀ, P., Schonewille, M., Renzi, M., Viltono, L., Sassoè-Pognetto, M., Badura, 
A., et al. (2009). Synaptic inhibition of Purkinje cells mediates consolidation 
of vestibulo-cerebellar motor learning. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1042–1049. doi: 
10.1038/nn.2348 
Yamazaki, T., Nagao, S., Lennon, W., and Tanaka, S. (2015). Modeling memory 
consolidation during post-training periods in cerebellovestibular learning. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 3541–3546. doi: 10.1073/pnas.14137 
98112 
Yeung, L. C., Shouval, H. Z., Blais, B. S., and Cooper, L. N. (2004). 
Synaptic homeostasis and input selectivity follow from a calcium-dependent 
plasticity model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 14943–14948. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0405555101 
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest. 
Copyright © 2015 Lennon, Yamazaki and Hecht-Nielsen. This is an open-access 
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC 
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution 
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. 
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 
14 
December 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 150 

/*** End Page =13= ***/
