/*** Page =0= ***/
Immunity, suicide or both? Ecological 
determinants for the combined evolution of 
anti-pathogen defense systems 
Jaime Iranzo, Alexander E Lobkovsky, Yuri I Wolf and Eugene V Koonin* 
Abstract 
Background: Parasite-host arms race is one of the key factors in the evolution of life. Most cellular life forms, in 
particular prokaryotes, possess diverse forms of defense against pathogens including innate immunity, adaptive 
immunity and programmed cell death (altruistic suicide). Coevolution of these different but interacting defense 
strategies yields complex evolutionary regimes. 
Results: We develop and extensively analyze a computational model of coevolution of different defense strategies 
to show that suicide as a defense mechanism can evolve only in structured populations and when the attainable 
degree of immunity against pathogens is limited. The general principle of defense evolution seems to be that hosts do 
not evolve two costly defense mechanisms when one is sufficient. Thus, the evolutionary interplay of innate immunity, 
adaptive immunity and suicide, leads to an equilibrium state where the combination of all three defense strategies is 
limited to a distinct, small region of the parameter space. The three strategies can stably coexist only if none of them 
are highly effective. Coupled adaptive immunity-suicide systems, the existence of which is implied by the colocalization 
of genes for the two types of defense in prokaryotic genomes, can evolve either when immunity-associated suicide is 
more efficacious than other suicide systems or when adaptive immunity functionally depends on the associated suicide 
system. 
Conclusions: Computational modeling reveals a broad range of outcomes of coevolution of anti-pathogen defense 
strategies depending on the relative efficacy of different mechanisms and population structure. Some of the predictions 
of the model appear compatible with recent experimental evolution results and call for additional experiments. 
Background 
The arms race between pathogens and hosts is a major 
force in evolution that is likely to have played key roles in 
the origins of multicellularity and sexual reproduction, 
among other biological phenomena [1-5]. In this race, 
hosts (both prokaryotic and eukaryotic) have evolved a 
broad repertoire of defense strategies, sometimes at the 
expense of allocating substantial resources and genomic 
space for defense functions [6-11]. Although a vast diver- 
sity of defense mechanisms exists across different life 
forms, the defense strategies can be generally classified 
into three groups [12]: (i) innate immunity systems 
that are based on recognition of conserved features of 
pathogens; (ii) adaptive (acquired) immunity systems that 
provide enhanced efficiency through pathogen-specific 
(Lamarckian-type) adaptive evolution [9,13,14]; and (iii) 
suicidal systems that cause programmed cell death (PCD) 
preventing further spread of the infection [15-17]. In 
principle, the PCD strategy can be considered a form of 
innate immunity given the apparent lack of specificity to 
particular pathogens in this form of defense [18,19]. How- 
ever, given the substantial differences between the out- 
comes of immune response and programmed cell death 
for host, we adhere to the threefold classification of 
defense strategies for the purpose of the present analysis. 
In prokaryotes, innate immunity involves, among other 
forms, receptor masking, restriction-modification (R-M), 
Argonaute-based RNAi-like machinery and DNA phos- 
phorothioation systems [7,20-22]. Adaptive immunity 
that until recently had been considered a distinctive 
innovation in animals, is represented in prokaryotes by 
* Correspondence: koonin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 
© 2015 Iranzo et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain 
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, 
unless otherwise stated. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
DOI 10.1186/s12862-015-0324-2 

/*** End Page =0= ***/
/*** Page =1= ***/
the CRISPR-Cas systems that are found in nearly all ar- 
chaea and many bacteria [23-25]. Suicide (PCD) mech- 
anisms comprise toxin-antitoxin (TA) and abortive 
infection (Abi) systems [26-28]. Although most of these 
defense mechanisms are widely distributed across the 
prokaryotic world, the prevalence of each class greatly 
varies among taxa [7]. Moreover, genes encoding differ- 
ent defense systems are often clustered in genomic 
islands, suggesting that some of them might function in 
association [7,29]. In particular, most CRISPR-Cas loci 
as well as many R-M loci contain genes encoding pre- 
dicted toxins, leading to the hypothesis of a functional 
coupling between immunity and suicide or dormancy 
[7,12,30,31]. The diversity, intricacy and patchy distribu- 
tion of anti-pathogen resistance mechanisms imply a 
highly complex evolutionary history so that unraveling the 
causes for the presence or absence of particular defense 
systems in individual taxa becomes a difficult task. 
The fate of defense systems in a host population de- 
pends on multiple factors and trade-offs that contribute 
to the cost-benefit balance [32-35]. On the one hand, 
the benefits of having such systems depend on their effi- 
cacy and the frequency of infections. Efficacy itself is the 
outcome of the evolutionary arms race with pathogens, 
and in the case of CRISPR-Cas, mathematical modeling 
suggests that the efficacy of protection negatively corre- 
lates with virus diversity and host and virus effective 
population sizes [36,37]. On the other hand, fitness costs 
can vary for different systems and depend on physical 
and ecological variables, such as temperature, the iden- 
tity of the pathogens targeted by the resistance mecha- 
nisms and the relevance of horizontal transfer for the 
acquisition of beneficial genes [38-43]. Population struc- 
ture also likely plays a role in the evolution of defense 
systems, not only through the repercussions for the eco- 
logical pathogen-host dynamics [44], but also via direct 
and indirect effects on the efficacies of different forms of 
defense [45]. Such effects are well illustrated by experi- 
ments with a genetically engineered suicidal system in 
Escherichia coli which proved to be a successful phage 
defense mechanism in soft agar culture but not in liquid 
medium [46]. Fully compatible conclusions on the essen- 
tial, general role of population structure for the evolution 
and maintenance of programmed cell death have been 
reached by mathematical modeling [4]. Finally, pre- 
existing resistance could affect the evolution of additional 
defense systems [47]. Specifically, the question ‘Why 
evolving two costly systems for a single task?’ applies to 
the evolution of suicide in the presence of immunity, 
especially because suicide can be interpreted as a 
defense system with an infinite individual fitness cost. 
Here we develop and analyze a computational model 
aimed at understanding which types of defense mecha- 
nisms evolve under distinct ecological conditions. We 
examine a scenario where hosts already possess some de- 
gree of resistance to pathogens via innate immunity and 
can evolve additional, costly immunity and/or suicide 
mechanisms. By exploring a broad range of immune and 
suicide efficacies in combination with variable degrees of 
population structure (from a well-mixed population to a 
fully structured population with no migration), simula- 
tions reveal a spectrum of evolutionary behaviors charac- 
terized by the acquisition of one, two or all three classes of 
defense mechanisms. While population structure proves 
critical for the evolution of cell suicide, acquisition of 
immunity mostly depends on its efficacy. We also ex- 
tended the model to investigate possible causes and 
consequences of coupling between adaptive immunity 
and suicide. Taken as a whole, these results provide 
context to the co-occurrence of defense mechanisms in 
nature. 
Methods 
The computational model of pathogen-host coevolution 
We set out to model a population of hosts and patho- 
gens embedded in an interaction network. Such a net- 
work determines not only the local dispersion of the 
pathogen but also the possible locations of a host’s off- 
spring. In addition, long-range dispersion of hosts and 
pathogens to random locations on the network is 
allowed at certain mixing rates. As the long-range dis- 
persion rates increase, the structured system gradually 
gives way to a well-mixed one. Two types of interaction 
networks were implemented: (i) a square grid resembling 
a 2-dimensional spatial structure, and (ii) a community 
network in which hosts are structured in a number of 
tightly connected clusters (cliques) of a given size. In the 
latter case, clusters other than self can only be accessed 
through long-range dispersion of host and pathogen. 
Only one host per site is allowed. For computational 
purposes, the number of pathogens per site is limited to 
1000 (although in practice such a high number is not 
reached). In the community network, group sizes ran- 
ging from 2 to 100 totally connected sites per group 
were explored through separate simulations. The net- 
work size, which determines the carrying capacity for 
hosts in the simulations, is equal to 106. 
Ecological and evolutionary dynamics come into play 
through the following processes: 
(1) Host reproduction at a rate g, which succeeds if a 
randomly chosen neighbor site in the network is 
empty. In such a case, a copy of the parent host is 
placed in that site. 
(2) Host death at a rate dhost 
(3) Infection at a rate b * npath where npath is the 
number of pathogens sharing the site with the host. 
Infection immediately leads to three possible outcomes: 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page2of14 

/*** End Page =1= ***/
/*** Page =2= ***/
(3a) Host survives and no pathogen is produced 
(efficient immunity). 
(3b) Host dies and no pathogen is produced (efficient 
suicide). 
(3c) Host dies and M pathogens are produced (efficient 
infection). 
The outcome of the infection depends on the immune 
efficacies (pII for innate immunity, pAI for adaptive im- 
munity, pCD for suicide) and it is decided a sequential 
way: first, an innate immune response is tried. If it fails 
(which occurs with probability 1 − pCD), adaptive im- 
munity comes into play. Suicide can be attempted before 
or after immunity; the differences between the two re- 
gimes are addressed when relevant. Because either im- 
munity, suicide or pathogen release occurs right after 
the infection there is no reproduction or dispersion of 
infected hosts. 
(4) Pathogen degradation at a rate dpath. 
(5) Pathogen diffusion to neighbor sites at a rate D. 
(6) Population mixing: the contents of two randomly 
chosen sites are swapped at rates rmixhost (for hosts) 
and rmixpath (for pathogens). A fully structured 
scenario is set by making both rates equal to zero in 
the square grid network and to 0.01 in the community 
network. Notice that the latter requires a (small) value 
greater than zero in order to avoid total isolation of 
groups, which would lead to a population dynamics 
entirely driven by small-size effects, with fast and 
permanent extinction of parasites and/or hosts in 
separate groups. 
The model is implemented through a simplified ver- 
sion of the tau-leaping algorithm. First, a time step dt is 
set by taking the inverse of the largest event rate and 
multiplying it by 0.2; then per individual/per site prob- 
abilities for host reproduction, host death, infection, 
pathogen degradation and mixing events are calculated 
as pevent =1− e− rate × dt. Notice that, given our choice of 
dt and the parameter values, the probability of the same 
event affecting the same individual (host or pathogen) 
more than once per time step is negligible. In the case of 
diffusion the probability that a pathogen drifts a given 
distance is taken from a Poisson distribution with mean 
equal to D × dt. After calculating event probabilities, we 
proceed through every site in the network in a random 
order. At each site, host replication and death are tried 
first, sequentially followed by infection, pathogen deg- 
radation and pathogen diffusion. The number of patho- 
gens that are degraded is chosen from a Poisson 
distribution with mean pdegr × npath, where npath is the 
number of pathogens in the site after the outcome of a 
possible infection. The number of pathogens diffusing a 
given distance is chosen in a similar way and their final 
locations are independently decided. Once all sites have 
been updated, a number of mixing events for hosts and 
pathogens is drawn from a Poisson distribution with 
mean pmix times the number of sites in the network. 
Each mixing event is performed by randomly choosing 
two sites and exchanging their (host or pathogen) con- 
tents. This completes a cycle of the algorithm, which 
continues by setting a new time step and iterating the 
previous actions. 
The population is initialized with suicide propensity 
equal to zero. Each time a host replicates, mutations 
leading to small changes in the suicide propensity of the 
daughter cell can take place with probability . Muta- 
tions are implemented by randomly choosing a value 
from a uniform distribution in the interval (−ε, ε) and 
adding that to the suicide propensity pCD. Suicide pro- 
pensity is kept bounded between 0 and 1. The probabil- 
ity of successful suicide is the product of the suicide 
propensity and a parameter CDmax, which represents the 
maximum possible efficacy for suicide. In the simula- 
tions, parameters and ε take values 0.01 and 0.1, re- 
spectively; the outcome of the simulation was shown to 
be highly robust to changes in the values of these 
parameters. 
With respect to immunity, two or more classes of 
hosts with constant values of pII and pAI compete for 
fixation. Adaptive immunity (AI) is envisioned as a trait 
that provides the host with enhanced immunity at an 
additional cost. Under the assumption that there are dif- 
ferent timescales for immune adaptation (fast) and gain/ 
loss of AI-associated genes (slow), it is possible to assign 
a time-averaged efficacy to the adaptive immunity sys- 
tem and therefore circumvent explicit modelling of its 
“Lamarckian” adaptive dynamics. The immune efficacies 
pII and pAI should be interpreted as effective parame- 
ters, i.e. averages along an ecologically meaningful time- 
span which is long enough to allow for a large number 
of host-pathogen encounters but short compared to the 
evolutionary timescales involved in the acquisition and 
loss of innate and adaptive immunity systems. Mutations 
leading to AI acquisition or loss are set to occur with prob- 
ability λ = 0.001. The fitness cost of adaptive immunity, c, 
is modeled as a death rate increase. This fitness cost is paid 
even if adaptive immunity is not activated (notice that the 
case where immune activation entails an additional fitness 
cost is formally equivalent to the variant of the model ex- 
plored in section “Programmed cell death dependent on 
immunity”). 
Simulations run for 4000 host generations or until hosts 
or pathogens become extinct. As a preliminary step, an ex- 
tensive exploration of the parameter space was carried out 
in order to determine which parameter combinations 
allow for long-term coexistence of pathogens and hosts. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page3of14 

/*** End Page =2= ***/
/*** Page =3= ***/
Among those, the following base parameter values were 
selected: g =1.01, dhost =0.01, M =30, b =1, dpath =2, c = 
0.2, D = 10. To test the robustness of the results, several 
other parameter combinations within the coexistence 
space were also tried, with no qualitative changes. Also, 
ncreasing λ to 0.01 (so that mutation rates for suicide and 
adaptive immunity are the same) or ε to 0.5 (so that the 
effect of single mutations on suicide is larger) produced 
neither qualitative nor significant quantitative differences 
in the stationary state. Multiple combinations for parame- 
ters pII, pAI, pCD and CDmax were explored; the depend- 
ency of the results on their values is discussed along the 
text and the actual values used to produce the figures 
are specified in the figure captions. All simulations were 
performed using a C++ implementation of the model and 
the results were processed and analyzed with MATLAB 
(version R2014a, © 2014 The MathWorks, Inc.). 
Results 
Evolution of suicide in the absence of adaptive immunity 
In order to simplify analysis of the model, evolution of 
suicide is considered first in the absence of adaptive im- 
munity. To this end, all hosts are deprived of adaptive 
immunity (and its associated cost) from the beginning of 
the simulation and are not allowed to recover it. In these 
conditions, altruistic suicide evolves if (i) the efficacy of 
innate immunity is low or moderate, and (ii) the popula- 
tion is spatially structured (Figure 1). The first of these 
conditions is relaxed if suicide is only triggered once im- 
munity has failed. In such a case, suicide becomes a 
non-costly trait (there is no cost for committing suicide 
if the host has no chance of survival). This arguably un- 
realistic behavior disappears if an explicit fitness cost is 
considered for suicide (for instance, an increased basal 
mortality associated with accidental induction of suicide 
in the absence of pathogen). Other parameters of the 
model, such as the infection rate (b) or the pathogen off- 
spring number M, are relevant to determine the regions 
of the parameter space where hosts and pathogens can 
coexist but their relevance for the evolution of suicide is 
minor. Similar results were obtained with both the two- 
dimensional model and the community model. The case 
of different mixing rates for hosts and pathogens was 
also explored, with the result that evolution of suicide is 
much more sensitive to the long-range dispersion of 
hosts. As an example, for an immune efficacy of 0.2, sui- 
cide does not evolve if the host mixing rate is above 0.45 
whereas the pathogen mixing rate can increase up to 9.0 
without precluding suicide. 
Figure 1D shows that evolution of altruistic suicide is 
concomitant with the formation of persistent islands of 
interacting individuals. The two-dimensional setting re- 
veals that hosts self-organize in spatial islands that sur- 
vive the longer the greater their suicide propensity. In 
the absence of suicide, waves of pathogen periodically 
clear out groups of hosts which cannot persist for a long 
Figure 1 Evolution of altruistic suicide in the absence of adaptive immunity. A, B, C: Average suicide propensity of a population after the 
evolutionary process as a function on the efficacy of innate immunity and the population mixing rate. The color code in A indicates the mean 
suicide propensity. B shows results for varying immune efficacy in a fully structured population (mixing rate equal to 0). C shows the effect of 
weakening the population structure at a fixed immune efficacy equal to 0.2. D: Snapshots of the evolutionary process for an immune efficacy of 
0.2 and no mixing. Grey to red colors indicate the suicide propensity of a host (as in the color bar in A), white denotes empty sites and black 
infected hosts. In this setting, the decision to commit suicide occurs before immunity. Maximum suicide efficacy CDmax =1. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page4of14 

/*** End Page =3= ***/
/*** Page =4= ***/
time. However, as the suicide propensity evolves to higher 
values, host islands become more and more “impermeable” 
to the pathogen (i.e. suicide of the surface cells protects the 
inside of the island from the pathogen) which promotes 
persistence of such islands. In the two-dimensional setting, 
this effect is accompanied by a tendency of islands with 
high suicide propensity to grow and invade the available 
space. 
Complementary to the spatially extended setting, the 
community model provides for exploration of the effect 
of host group size on the evolution of altruistic suicide. 
Under this model, hosts are placed in semi-isolated 
groups of limited size that locally behave as well-mixed 
populations, migration across groups taking place at a 
low rate. For small groups (up to at least 20 hosts per 
group), we did not find any relevant differences with re- 
spect to suicide evolution, the results being similar to 
those obtained in the two-dimensional grid. In contrast, 
simulations show that suicide does not evolve if groups 
contain about 100 hosts or more. For such large groups, 
the adverse effect of within-group well-mixing is stronger 
than the positive effect of the meta-population structure. 
As a result, large groups with high degree of phenotypic 
heterogeneity require internal structure to prevent exploit- 
ation by ‘selfish’ hosts and maintain altruistic suicide as an 
efficient defense mechanism. 
Finally, we explored a scenario where the choice be- 
tween suicide and immunity is a selectable trait. Suicide 
before and suicide after immunity were treated as two 
alternative strategies that evolve independently and are 
equally accessible to the host. Under conditions that are 
favorable to the evolution of suicide, suicide after im- 
munity always outcompetes suicide before immunity so 
that the final state of the population fully consists of 
hosts in which suicide is triggered only when immunity 
fails (Figure 2). 
Evolution of adaptive immunity in the absence of suicide 
We further explored evolution of adaptive immunity in 
hosts with no suicide. In this setting, suicide propensity 
is set to zero, and two classes of hosts, with and without 
adaptive immunity, compete for the limited spatial 
resources. Both classes of hosts have the same level of 
innate immunity and only differ by the presence or ab- 
sence of adaptive immunity the efficacy of which is kept 
constant during the simulations. Figure 3 (A,B) shows 
the final composition of the population as a function of 
the immune efficacies of the competing hosts. Three 
regimes can be observed: i) fixation of adaptive immun- 
ity, ii) coexistence of hosts with and without adaptive 
immunity, and iii) loss of adaptive immunity. Fixation of 
adaptive immunity is only possible at moderate efficacies 
of both innate and adaptive immunity. As intuitively 
expected, poorly performing adaptive immunity is lost 
because its benefits do not compensate for the associated 
fitness cost. In the other extreme, less intuitively, adaptive 
immunity cannot be fixed if its efficacy is too high. In this 
case, the concentration of pathogens becomes so low that 
hosts lacking adaptive immunity can survive by taking 
advantage of their higher fitness compared to the hosts 
possessing adaptive immunity. 
The effects of population structure and fitness cost on 
the evolution of adaptive immunity are merely quantita- 
tive. In particular, population structure favors adaptive im- 
munity and reduces the minimum efficacy that is required 
for it to reach fixation (Figure 3A). The likely causes of 
this effect are discussed below. Not surprisingly, the asso- 
ciated fitness cost has a direct effect on the maintenance 
of adaptive immunity, with higher costs requiring higher 
efficacy (not shown). This effect is especially pronounced 
in a well-mixed population; in a structured population, 
however, adaptive immunity can be fixed even at higher 
costs. 
Combined evolution of suicide and adaptive immunity 
In the well-mixed system, suicide does not evolve and the 
results are the same as those described in the previous 
section for the case without suicide. In structured popula- 
tions, the interaction of suicide and immunity results in a 
complex behavior that yields different combinations of the 
three defense mechanisms. 
As schematically shown in Figure 4, different efficacies 
of the innate and adaptive immunities, as well as differ- 
ent values of the maximum suicide efficacy, give rise to 
distinct evolutionary outcomes which can be organized 
in a phase diagram with 6 regions (Figure 4 C, D). 
Figure 2 Suicide after immunity failure is favored compared to 
suicide before immunity. The color code, from red to blue, indicates 
the relative contribution of suicide before and after immunity to the 
total suicide propensity, provided that both strategies are equally 
accessible to the host. Horizontal and vertical axes correspond to 
different values of the immune efficacy and the cost of maintaining 
suicide, respectively. Cases of ‘no suicide’ correspond to final suicide 
propensities below 0.1. Fully structured population with maximum 
suicide efficacy CDmax =1. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page5of14 

/*** End Page =4= ***/
/*** Page =5= ***/
Suicide and adaptive immunity coevolve in a region 
({IAD}) that typically corresponds to small and moderate 
efficacies of the innate immunity and moderate efficacy of 
the adaptive immunity, and only if there is also a limit on 
the efficacy of suicide. When the efficacy of adaptive im- 
munity exceeds a certain threshold, suicide no longer 
evolves ({IA}). For even higher efficacies of adaptive im- 
munity (I+{IA}), the evolutionary process gives rise to two 
divergent classes: hosts with adaptive immunity coexist 
with hosts that lack it, both exhibiting negligible suicide 
propensities. Notably, in the narrow coexistence region 
({ID} + {IAD}), both classes of hosts, those with and with- 
out adaptive immunity, evolve high suicide propensities. 
In this region, the efficacy of adaptive immunity systems 
lies just below the threshold of fixation. In the long term, 
however, populations within this region might end up los- 
ing adaptive immunity (Figure 5). Finally, adaptive im- 
munity is lost if either its efficacy is too low or the efficacy 
of innate immunity is too high. In the former case ({ID}), 
hosts evolve suicide as an additional defense mechanism; 
in the latter (I only), innate immunity is the only defense 
mechanism of the population. Temporal dynamics for rep- 
resentatives of each region are shown in Figure 5. 
A comparison of the panels B, C, and D from Figure 3 
makes it clear that evolution of suicide can preclude 
fixation of adaptive immunity. Specifically, as suicide 
evolves to higher efficacies (i.e. larger values of the par- 
ameter CDmax), fixation of adaptive immunity becomes 
restricted to an increasingly narrow region of the param- 
eter space. Figure 4A, B shows how increasing CDmax 
results in higher AI efficacies being required for AI fix- 
ation and a concomitant shrinkage of the region in 
which AI and suicide coevolve. A detailed analysis of 
such instances reveals a transient two-stage dynamics 
(Figure 5, {ID} and {ID} + {IAD}): first, adaptive immun- 
ity spreads in the population getting relatively close to 
fixation; subsequently, altruistic suicide evolves in a mi- 
nority of hosts that lack adaptive immunity. Eventually, 
these individuals pervade the population and adaptive 
immunity is lost. 
Figure 3 Fixation of adaptive immunity only takes place for a certain range of immune efficacies. The evolutionary process takes place at 
fixed values of innate and adaptive immune efficacies and the fraction of hosts with adaptive immunity is recorded in the stationary state. The. 
x-axis corresponds to the (externally fixed) efficacy of the innate immunity; the y-axis to the (externally fixed) efficacy of adaptive immunity; the 
color code indicates the fraction of hosts with adaptive immunity. Regions in red indicate fixation of adaptive immunity, while those in blue 
denote its loss. Coexistence of hosts with and without adaptive immunity takes place in regions with lighter colors. The evolutionary process takes 
place in (A) a well-mixed scenario, (B) a structured population without possibility of suicide, and (C, D) a structured population with the possibility of 
evolving suicide, with a maximum suicide efficacies of CDmax =0.3(C) or CDmax =1(D). 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page6of14 

/*** End Page =5= ***/
/*** Page =6= ***/
We further tested whether adaptive immunity interferes 
with the evolution of suicide. To this end, combined 
immunity was defined as a measure of the combined 
efficacy of innate and adaptive immunity. Because both 
forms of immunity act sequentially and independently, 
the combined immune efficacy pItot equals to 1 − (1 − pII) 
(1 − pAI). Figure 6 shows the average suicide propensity 
versus the combined immunity for a set of simulations 
performed with different innate and adaptive immune 
efficacies. When adaptive immunity is lost, the results 
coincide with those obtained in the absence of adap- 
tive immunity. Likewise, hosts with adaptive immunity 
(either fixed or in coexistence) show suicide propen- 
sities similar to those expected for equivalent immune 
efficacies in the absence of adaptive immunity. There- 
fore, it can be concluded that adaptive immunity does 
not specifically affect evolution of suicide as a defense 
mechanism. 
The results presented in this section remain qualita- 
tively the same regardless of whether suicide is activated 
before or after immunity, provided that a fitness cost for 
maintaining suicide is included (with zero cost suicide 
after immunity always evolves, whereas no changes are 
observed for suicide before immunity). The average sui- 
cide propensities might be slightly higher in the latter 
case but the regions of the phase diagrams (Figure 4C, 
D) remain similar. 
Programmed cell death dependent on immunity 
Prokaryotic adaptive immunity systems, in particular 
CRISPR-Cas, encompass genes that are otherwise impli- 
cated in cell suicide such as toxin nucleases. In an attempt 
to shed light on the evolutionary factors behind such a 
tight co-occurrence of immunity and suicide, we exam- 
ined a scenario where activation of adaptive immunity can 
lead to cell death and no pathogen production with 
Figure 4 Coevolution of adaptive immunity and suicide in a structured population depends on the immune and suicide efficacies. 
(A): Fraction of hosts with adaptive immunity in the stationary state of the evolutionary process, as a function of the AI efficacy (pAI, y-axis) and 
the maximum suicide efficacy attainable (CDmax, x-axis). Red accounts for AI fixation, blue for AI loss. The II efficacy has been fixed to pII = 0.2. 
(B): Suicide propensity evolved by majority hosts, in the same conditions as in A. Red accounts for high suicide propensities, blue for low or no 
suicide. The double white line separates two regions for which the majority hosts differ, in accordance to panel A. Notice that the actual suicide 
probability, pCD, is the product of the suicide propensity and the maximum suicide efficacy attainable, CDmax. (C, D): Phase diagrams for the combined 
evolution of suicide and adaptive immunity in a structured population. I:innateimmunity;A:adaptiveimmunity;D:suicide;bracketsindicate 
coevolution of traits within the same host; regions with a striped shading pattern present coexistence of hosts with different sets of 
defense mechanisms. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page7of14 

/*** End Page =6= ***/
/*** Page =7= ***/
probability q. This regime is equivalent to adding a new 
contribution to the suicide propensity of the form q * pAI. 
Two alternative formulations of the total suicide probabil- 
ity can be considered: on the one hand, if AI-dependent 
cell death is not affected by the maximum suicide efficacy, 
then pCDtotal = pCD + q * pAI *(1− pCD); on the other 
hand, if the maximum suicide efficacy CDmax also limits 
AI-dependent cell death, then pCDtotal = pCD + q * pAI * 
(CDmax − pCD). In both cases, relatively large values of q 
are required to obtain significant contributions of adaptive 
immunity to cell death. We studied the possible outcomes 
of an evolutionary process where hosts can possess either 
an adaptive immunity system which does not induce 
suicide (q = 0, no AI-dependent suicide), or an adaptive 
immunity system which does induce suicide (q =0.5, sub- 
stantial AI-dependent suicide), or no adaptive immunity. 
The AI-independent suicide can evolve as described in the 
preceding sections; the probability of mutations leading to 
gain/loss of AI-dependent suicide was set at 0.001. The re- 
sults shown in Figure 7 indicate that suicide-inducing im- 
munity can be preferentially selected for in structured 
populations under conditions such that (i) coevolution of 
adaptive immunity and suicide is the expected evolution- 
ary outcome and (ii) death induced by adaptive immunity 
is not limited by CDmax. If AI-dependent death is limited 
by CDmax, suicide-inducing adaptive immunity is transi- 
ently favored early in the evolutionary process but be- 
comes a neutral trait compared to “simple” AI as soon as 
the probability of AI-independent suicide reaches values 
close to CDmax. Finally, an adaptive immunity system that 
does not induce cell death is selected for in regions that 
are unfavorable to suicide evolution (this is also the case 
in well-mixed systems). 
Immunity dependent on cell death mechanisms 
A distinct cause of the coupling between immunity and 
suicide could be that some of the functions performed 
by suicide genes are required for the immunity system 
to function as suggested, in particular, by the essentiality 
of Cas2, a homolog of toxin nucleases, for the CRISPR- 
Cas function [48], and presence of a number of other 
putative toxins in the CRISPR-cas loci [7,12,49]. Func- 
tional coupling between suicide and adaptive immunity 
can be introduced into the model by making the efficacy 
of adaptive immunity dependent on the suicide propensity. 
A simple logistic relation was chosen for this dependence 
Figure 5 Evolutionary dynamics of defense mechanisms, 
representatives of each of the six regions of the phase 
diagram. Black: fraction of hosts with adaptive immunity; red: 
average suicide propensity in hosts with adaptive immunity; blue: 
average suicide propensity in hosts without adaptive immunity. 
Maximum suicide efficacy has been fixed to CDmax = 0.3, values of pII 
and pAI have been chosen from the phase diagram in Figure 4C to 
represent each possible evolutionary outcome. Population structured 
in a square grid with no mixing. 
Figure 6 Adaptive immunity does not affect the evolution of 
suicide. The effective immune efficacy combines the efficacies of 
innate and adaptive immunities in a single parameter, so that results 
can be compared to the case with no adaptive immunity (solid line). 
Black circles correspond to instances that lead to the loss of adaptive 
immunity; solid red circles are used for instances with fixation of 
adaptive immunity; open red circles for hosts with adaptive immunity 
in instances without fixation. Data collapsed for structured populations 
with multiple values of pII and pAI; CDmax =0.3. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page8of14 

/*** End Page =7= ***/
/*** Page =8= ***/
pAIeff = AImax * pCD/(pCD + kAI). In this model kAI is a 
parameter that determines the shape of the dependence 
between suicide and adaptive immunity, and AImax is the 
maximum possible value of pAI. For small suicide propen- 
sities, the effective pAI is equal to AImax * pCD/kAI.If 
pCD kAI, the effective pAI tends to AImax. Given that 
pCD only takes values smaller or equal to unity, the max- 
imum value that pAIeff can take is AImax/(1 + kAI). 
Functional coupling of adaptive immunity with suicide 
could result in the evolution of suicide under conditions 
where it would not normally evolve, e.g. in well-mixed 
populations or at high effective immunity levels. More- 
over, relatively weak coupling (kAI = 0.5) is sufficient to 
observe these effects. To test whether functional coup- 
ling can explain the tight genomic co-occurrence of 
immunity and suicide genes, we use the logistic depend- 
ence of pAIeff on pCDtotal with the possibility that adap- 
tive immunity contributes to pCDtotal, as in the previous 
section. Here we assume logistic dependence (functional 
coupling) and allow the adaptive immunity system to 
mutate between variants that do or do not induce add- 
itional death (q = 0.5 and q = 0, respectively). The same 
two cases as before, with CDmax limiting total suicide or 
AI-independent suicide only, were explored. Simulations 
for different values of AImax and pII (Figure 7C, D) show 
that an adaptive immunity system that also induces 
death is strongly promoted if the suicide induced by AI 
is not limited by CDmax. Conversely, if such a limit is in 
place, adaptive immunity systems that do not induce sui- 
cide tend to be selected for, provided that there is some 
degree of AI-independent suicide. 
Discussion 
General considerations on the modeling approach 
In real biological communities, the efficacy of innate and 
adaptive immune systems is constrained by ecological 
factors such as population size, structure and diversity. 
The never-stopping arms race between hosts and patho- 
gens sets a limit on the performance of defense strat- 
egies, which is determined by the ability of the host to 
keep the pace with pathogen escape mutations. In that 
regard, studies on host-parasite local adaptation suggest 
that parasites are usually ahead of hosts in this coevolu- 
tionary arms race [50,51]. Accordingly, evolution of im- 
mune systems is modeled here under the assumption that 
they have a constant efficacy that is extrinsically deter- 
mined by a multiplicity of factors that go beyond the con- 
trol of the host. In this simple model, the evolutionary 
process only determines the relative abundance of hosts 
with and without a given type of immune systems in the 
population. Nevertheless, even in this simple setting, the 
combination of different immune efficacies, population 
structure and long range dispersal leads to a complex 
interplay between different evolutionary outcomes which 
we aimed to explore here. 
The notion of effective immune efficacies is valid under 
the assumption that there are two well differentiated time- 
scales: (i) a relatively fast timescale for the processes of 
pathogen escape and host immune adaptation; (ii) a sig- 
nificantly slower timescale for the evolution (gain/loss) of 
defense mechanisms. Under this timescale separation, var- 
iations in immune efficacy due to the former processes 
can be considered transient perturbations around a time- 
Figure 7 Alternative models for the evolution of coupled suicide and immunity. Two types of AI systems are considered: one whose 
activation can lead to cell death (suicide) with the probability q = 0.5, and another that only works as a standard immune mechanism (with no 
induction of additional suicide). Mutations between both types occur with a small probability. The figure shows the relative fraction of hosts with 
suicide-inducer AI in the stationary state (normalized by the fraction of hosts with any kind of AI, the value 0.5 has been assigned wherever hosts 
with AI represent less than 10% of the population). The evolutionary process was simulated in a structured population with different values of the 
innate and adaptive immune efficacies (pII and pAI), and a fixed value of the maximum suicide efficacy CDmax = 0.3. In A, the maximum suicide 
efficacy only affects AI-independent suicide; in B, the maximum suicide efficacy limits all kinds of suicide, included suicide induced by AI. Panels 
C and D correspond to a modified scenario where the efficacy of AI depends on the total degree of suicide according to a logistic formula; 
in C there is no limitation on AI-induced suicide, whereas in D it is limited by CDmax.TheredregioninpanelD (but not in other panels) is 
also characterized by the absence of AI-independent suicide. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page9of14 

/*** End Page =8= ***/
/*** Page =9= ***/
averaged efficacy, which is the relevant value at longer 
evolutionary timescales. For the CRISPR-Cas system, this 
assumption implies that the characteristic timescales of 
viral proto-spacer mutation and host spacer incorporation 
are substantially faster than the timescale of CRISRPR-Cas 
loci gain/loss, an assumption that seems to be borne by 
the available observations [24,52]. We note that, because 
of timescale separation, the long term evolutionary dy- 
namics of adaptive immunity can be studied by modeling 
adaptive immunity as a sort of stronger “innate immunity” 
with a higher cost. The same approximation would not be 
valid, though, to study short term, fine grained coevolution 
of hosts and parasites. A further limitation of our model 
concerns the immediate resolution of the infection event 
towards immunity, suicide or pathogen release. While this 
approach is especially suitable for modeling lytic infec- 
tions, it does not account for the effects of persistent 
infections or milder parasites. In such cases, migration 
and/or reproduction of infected hosts should be taken into 
account, as well as possible differences in timing between 
different defense mechanisms. Indeed, theoretical studies 
in the former direction suggest that evolution of altruistic 
defense traits is hindered when infected hosts conserve 
some degree of reproductive ability [45]. 
The binary nature of the adaptive immunity trait in 
our model captures the qualitative difference between 
having and not having a functional CRISPR-Cas system. 
In contrast, pathogen-induced cell death (suicide) is 
modeled as a continuous trait such that, for a given host, 
the suicide propensity is the probability that a host 
attempts suicide when it becomes infected. Successful 
suicide leads to the death of the host and no pathogen 
release. Mutations affecting the suicide propensity can 
be interpreted as the result of variations in the copy 
number of toxin-antitoxins or other systems that con- 
tribute to cell death. Because a genome may contain a 
large number of loci involved in suicide [7], the relative 
effect of single mutations on the net suicide propensity 
are presumably small. By modeling programmed cell 
death as a quantitative trait, we capture this gradual nature 
of suicide evolution. Simulations explore the possibility 
that suicide gradually evolves starting from a population 
with zero suicide propensity. Provided that pathogens can 
also counter suicide mechanisms by inhibiting them or 
delaying their effect [6,53], it seems appropriate to include 
a maximum efficacy for suicide which limits the probability 
of successful suicide even if the suicide propensity is equal 
to one. 
Throughout this analysis, we observed that population 
structure substantially affected the outcomes of pathogen- 
host interaction and evolution of defense mechanisms. In 
a structured population, hosts and pathogens are not ran- 
domly mixed in a homogeneous environment. Population 
structure can result from purely physical constraints (e.g. 
limited host and pathogen diffusion) or from the way indi- 
viduals interact with each other (e.g. social networks). In 
order to account for both possibilities, the model was 
tested in two structured settings: a 2-dimensional grid 
with limited diffusion and a community network in which 
small groups of hosts closely interact with each other. The 
results were closely similar in both settings, confirming 
that population structure itself, regardless of its particular 
origin and implementation, is the cause of the observed 
behaviors. 
Evolution of different types of immunity and suicide 
As shown in the preceding sections, suicide only evolves 
in structured populations for which long range dispersal 
remains under a threshold rate. Why is population struc- 
ture required for the evolution of suicide? As with other 
altruistic traits, a host does not benefit from its own sui- 
cide. Instead, it provides a benefit to its neighbors by 
preventing the local spread of the infection. Therefore, 
suicide can evolve only when there is phenotypic re- 
latedness among neighbors [54,55]. In a structured 
population, hosts with a high suicide propensity will be 
likely surrounded by other suicide-prone hosts and ac- 
cordingly receive indirect benefit from the suicide of 
their neighbors [45]. Long-range dispersion, as well as 
population mixing, would bring together hosts with 
large and small suicide propensities. In a well-mixed 
population, the latter take advantage of the former so 
that suicide propensity becomes a disadvantage. From a 
game theory perspective, this dynamics defines a social 
dilemma where population structure allows altruistic 
hosts (those with high suicide propensity) to beat selfish 
ones (those with small suicide propensity) [56]. High 
rates of long-range pathogen dispersal can also preclude 
the evolution of suicide if local pathogen spread be- 
comes irrelevant compared to the constant arrival of 
pathogens from the outside. Multiple experimental stud- 
ies in bacteria have shown that population structure 
(low dispersal rate) is indeed essential for the evolution 
of cooperative traits [57-59] and in particular altruistic 
suicide [46,60]. It should be noted that, although not 
considered in our model, horizontal gene transfer could 
also promote evolution of altruistic suicide by increasing 
phenotypic relatedness between neighboring hosts [61]. 
The results of the present model of suicide evolution re- 
veal an antagonism between the ‘interests’ of hosts and 
pathogens in structured populations whereby, while hosts 
tend to evolve suicide, prevention of host death is the pre- 
ferred strategy for the pathogen. Indeed, it has been shown 
that experimental evolution of phages under conditions of 
local dispersion leads to ‘prudent’ (less virulent) variants 
of the virus, in contrast to the virulent forms evolved in a 
well-mixed environment [46]. Theoretical work also sug- 
gests that reduced virulence is the most likely evolutionary 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page 10 of 14 

/*** End Page =9= ***/
/*** Page =10= ***/
outcome under conditions of low pathogen dispersal, 
whereas intermediate dispersal rates can lead to high viru- 
lence [62]. It is therefore plausible that, in structured popu- 
lations, the host-pathogen arms race has a major effect on 
the genes involved in cell death and its inhibition. Numer- 
ous viruses indeed have evolved mechanisms preventing 
host cell death, often by recruiting genes involved in host 
suicide and turning them into competitive inhibitors of cell 
death [63-65] or else via repair of the damage involved in 
cell death [66]. 
Adaptive immunity provides a direct benefit to the 
host organism that possesses the immune mechanism 
and thus does not require population structure to evolve. 
There are, however, instances when population structure 
favors fixation of adaptive immunity through a mechan- 
ism analogous to the one observed for altruistic suicide. 
Due to limited pathogen dispersion, hosts can benefit 
from the local decrease in pathogen abundance produced 
by their neighbors’ adaptive immunity. In a structured 
population, neighboring hosts are phenotypically corre- 
lated, reinforcing the advantage of adaptive immunity and 
contributing to its fixation. This effect could allow fixation 
of adaptive immunity even under conditions where the 
cost-benefit balance is not in its favor. On the other hand, 
if the immune efficacy is too high, hosts with and without 
adaptive immunity tend to coexist as the former generate 
environments with low pathogen pressure. This result 
resembles those obtained by previous theoretical stud- 
ies on well-mixed populations, which predict lack of 
fixation for highly effective immunity systems and possible 
polymorphisms on the degree of immunity evolved by 
hosts [67,68]. 
Joint modeling of suicide and adaptive immunity gives 
rise to a distribution of evolutionary outcomes (a phase 
space) that cannot be simply explained through separate 
analysis of each of these defense mechanisms. For in- 
stance, high suicide efficacies prevent fixation of adaptive 
immunity not only in those regions where the cost-benefit 
balance for adaptive immunity is slightly unfavorable (even 
if fixation would occur in the absence of suicide by virtue 
of population structure), but also in some regions where 
this balance is favorable to adaptive immunity. There 
seems to be a rule of thumb whereby hosts do not evolve 
an additional, costly defense mechanism when one such 
mechanism is sufficient for effective defense. The most ob- 
vious manifestation of this simple principle is that, when 
innate immunity is highly effective, no other defense 
mechanisms evolve. Similarly, hosts with large suicide effi- 
cacy overtake those with adaptive immunity provided that 
the suicide propensity is greater than a threshold that 
grows with the efficacy of adaptive immunity. Notwith- 
standing this general trend, innate and adaptive immunity 
systems appear to coexist in other regions of the phase 
space. Such a coexistence is compatible with the recent 
explicit experimental demonstration of the synergy be- 
tween R-M and CRISPR-Cas in bacterial resistance to bac- 
teriophages [69]. Finally, there is a region of moderate 
immune and suicide efficacies where hosts take advantage 
of a combination of all three defense mechanisms: innate 
immunity, adaptive immunity, and suicide. 
In an attempt to explain the tight connection between 
the CRISPR-Cas systems and (predicted) toxin genes 
[7,12,49], we explored the possible evolutionary advantage 
of an AI system which also induces suicide with a given 
probability. Such a coupled system can be advantageous if 
(i) suicide itself is advantageous in those particular evolu- 
tionary conditions and (ii) the efficacy of AI-associated 
suicide exceeds that of other suicide mechanisms. The 
same two conditions for the evolution of a coupled 
AI-suicide system were identified in a modified model 
that considers a small suicide propensity as a pre-requisite 
for the evolution of effective adaptive immunity (i.e. when 
components of the suicide machinery also contribute to 
adaptive immunity). 
Host suicide can potentially evolve either as an imme- 
diate response to infection or as a means of last resort 
after immunity mechanisms fail to stop pathogen 
reproduction [12]. Intuitively, the second strategy would 
appear advantageous, and indeed in our model, when 
the two strategies evolve independently and then are 
allowed to compete, “suicide after immunity failure 
wins”. However, under a non-negligible cost of suicide, 
the probabilities of it evolving before and after immunity 
is tried are comparable. It is worth mentioning that, at 
cost zero, the conditions for the evolution of suicide 
after immunity become greatly relaxed. Thus, the cost of 
suicide appears to be a key determinant of the evolution- 
ary regime. Recent experiments with suicide-prone E. 
coli have shown that at least when defense against highly 
virulent phages is involved, the cost of suicide could be 
quite low because the infected bacteria are moribund in 
any case and have virtually no chance to propagate [60]. 
Conceivably, these experiments reflect the regime with 
failing immunity and subsequent low-cost suicide. 
Implications for coevolution of prokaryotic defense 
mechanisms 
Together with innate immunity systems, cell suicide 
(programmed cell death) and adaptive immunity are 
widespread defense mechanisms in prokaryotes although 
adaptive immunity is far from being universal. Two inter- 
pretations, not mutually exclusive, appear plausible: 
(a) The efficacies of innate and adaptive immunity 
systems in prokaryotes lie in the appropriate region 
that allows for combined evolution of suicide and 
adaptive immunity. This view is compatible with 
the fact that adaptive immunity is not universal in 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page 11 of 14 

/*** End Page =10= ***/
/*** Page =11= ***/
prokaryotes and its presence or absence seems to be 
related to ecological variables (e.g. adaptive 
immunity is much more common in 
hyperthermophiles compared to mesophiles). Such 
a patchy distribution suggests that the mean 
efficacy of adaptive immunity is close to the 
boundary of the fixation region, with variation 
among ecosystems determining whether a 
particular host population maintains adaptive 
immunity or loses it. 
(b) Different defense mechanisms are geared to fight 
different threats. Immunity systems might be highly 
effective against certain threats but less proficient 
against others. Suicide can serve as a defense 
mechanism that acts on those threats against which 
the immunity systems are less effective. This 
scenario accounts for the pre-requisite of the 
evolution of suicide revealed by the analysis of the 
models, namely that immune efficacy has to be low 
or moderate for suicide to evolve and vice versa. 
Under both scenarios, population structure is required 
for the evolution of suicide. This pre-requisite had been 
previously proposed on the basis of experimental studies 
with a genetically engineered, suicidal strain of E. coli 
grown on agar plates [46] and is theoretically extended here 
to a broader spectrum of population structures, suicide 
efficacies and co-occurring immune mechanisms. 
The presence of programmed cell death systems in the 
great majority of prokaryotes strongly suggests that 
structured populations are the rule in microbial ecosys- 
tems [4]. Indeed, some kind of social interaction, such as 
biofilm formation, is found on almost every bacterial 
group, and more advanced forms of sociality, such as 
quorum sensing, are often present in Proteobacteria and 
Firmicutes [70-72]. However, the link between PCD and 
sociality is complicated by the fact that toxin-antitoxin 
and Abi are addictive selfish elements, so that their 
abundance in bacteria and archaea is likely to be in part 
dictated by this property rather than by any utility to the 
host [26,27]. 
With respect to the presence of genes encoding (pre- 
dicted) toxins in most if not all CRISPR-Cas loci, at least 
two, not necessarily mutually exclusive interpretations 
seem possible: 
(a) The CRISPR-associated toxin genes contribute to 
the suicide propensity of the cell, in such a way that 
cells with CRISPR-Cas-toxin systems are more 
effective in orchestrating suicidal responses than 
those with “regular” suicide systems only. 
(b) Suicide and adaptive immunity are functionally 
coupled, so that it is impossible to maintain an 
adaptive immunity system without previously 
developing other functionalities that involve suicide 
propensity. Although, under our model, coupled 
AI-suicide systems are not a necessary evolutionary 
outcome arising from this requirement alone, this 
could be the case if “regular”, non-AI-associated 
suicide systems were unable to provide the cells 
with the functionalities required to maintain a 
working adaptive immunity system. This possibility 
appears realistic given that evidence that Cas2 pro- 
tein, a homolog of toxin nucleases, is essential for 
the adaptation stage of the CRISPR response al- 
though the nuclease activity of this protein appar- 
ently is not required. Further investigation of the 
molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the 
adaptation step of the CRISPR-Cas adaptive im- 
munity is expected to clarify the nature of coupling 
between adaptive immunity and PCD. 
Conclusions 
Evolution of suicide as a defense mechanism is only pos- 
sible if (i) the host population is structured and (ii) the de- 
gree of immunity that the hosts can achieve by other 
means is limited. The widespread nature of suicide systems 
in prokaryotic genomes calls for a reconsideration of the 
relative importance of population structure for genome 
evolution. 
Perhaps somewhat paradoxically, fixation of a costly 
adaptive immunity system is precluded not only when the 
innate immunity and suicide systems are highly effective 
but also when adaptive immunity itself performs at a high 
level. In such a case, hosts with and without adaptive 
immunity coexist in an environment where the pathogen 
is scarce (herd immunity effect). 
Under the present model, the evolutionary interplay of 
suicide, innate immunity and adaptive immunity leads to 
an equilibrium state where the combination of all three 
defense mechanisms is limited to a distinct region of the 
parameter space. Such a region is smaller than it could 
be expected from studying suicide and adaptive immun- 
ity independently. This finding is consistent with the 
general principle that hosts do not usually evolve two 
costly defense mechanisms when one is sufficient. 
There is, however, a range in the efficacies of suicide, 
innate and adaptive immunity systems that leads to com- 
bined evolution of suicide and adaptive immunity. This 
outcome is possible only when none of these defense 
systems is highly effective and requires some degree of 
structure in the host population. Therefore, it can be 
predicted that certain ecological factors such as pathogen 
diversity and effective population sizes may indirectly pro- 
mote the evolution of alternative defense systems through 
limiting the effectiveness of prevailing ones. 
Finally, coupled adaptive immunity-suicide systems 
can arise under two distinct scenarios: first, if the AI- 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page 12 of 14 

/*** End Page =11= ***/
/*** Page =12= ***/
associated suicide shows a better performance than 
other suicide systems; second, if the adaptive immunity 
component functionally depends on its associated suicide 
component and such functionality cannot be provided by 
independent suicide systems. Further research on the 
molecular biology of CRISPR-Cas systems and their asso- 
ciated toxin genes will be necessary in order to assess the 
feasibility and contribution of each of these scenarios. 
The results of the present analysis most directly apply to 
the mechanisms of anti-pathogen defense in bacteria and 
archaea. However, the conclusions on the coevolution of 
different defense strategies suggest that the combination 
of immunity and/or suicide systems of multiple kinds is a 
general feature of evolving organisms. The patterns of 
co-occurrence of these mechanisms depend on ecological 
factors such as host and pathogen diversities and habitat 
structure. 
Abbreviations 
Abi: Abortive infection; AI: Adaptive immunity; II: Innate immunity; 
PCD: Programmed cell death; R-M: Restriction-modification; TA: Toxin-antitoxin. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Authors’ contributions 
JI performed research; JI, AEL, YIW and EVK analyzed the results; JI and EVK 
wrote the manuscript that was edited and approved by all authors. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Michael Galperin for helpful discussions on prokaryotic sociality. 
The authors are supported by intramural funds of the US Department of 
Health and Human Services (to the National Library of Medicine). 
Received: 12 December 2014 Accepted: 24 February 2015 
References 
1. Forterre P, Prangishvili D. The great billion-year war between ribosome- and 
capsid-encoding organisms (cells and viruses) as the major source of 
evolutionary novelties. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009;1178:65–77. 
2. Forterre P, Prangishvili D. The major role of viruses in cellular evolution: facts 
and hypotheses. Curr Opin Virol. 2013;3(5):558–65. 
3. Koonin EV, Wolf YI. Evolution of microbes and viruses: a paradigm shift in 
evolutionary biology? Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2012;2:119. 
4. Iranzo J, Lobkovsky AE, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. Virus-host arms race at the joint 
origin of multicellularity and programmed cell death. Cell Cycle. 
2014;13:3083–8. 
5. Stern A, Sorek R. The phage-host arms race: shaping the evolution of microbes. 
Bioessays. 2011;33(1):43–51. 
6. Labrie SJ, Samson JE, Moineau S. Bacteriophage resistance mechanisms. 
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2010;8:317–27. 
7. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. Comparative genomics of defense systems 
in archaea and bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(8):4360–77. 
8. Rechavi O. Guest list or black list: heritable small RNAs as immunogenic 
memories. Trends Cell Biol. 2013;24(4):212–20. 
9. Rimer J, Cohen IR, Friedman N. Do all creatures possess an acquired 
immune system of some sort? Bioessays. 2014;36(3):273–81. 
10. Boehm T. Design principles of adaptive immune systems. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2011;11(5):307–17. 
11. Boehm T. Evolution of vertebrate immunity. Curr Biol. 2012;22(17):R722–732. 
12. Makarova KS, Anantharaman V, Aravind L, Koonin EV. Live virus-free or die: 
coupling of antivirus immunity and programmed suicide or dormancy in 
prokaryotes. Biol Direct. 2012;7:40. 
13. Bergstrom CT, Antia R. How do adaptive immune systems control 
pathogens while avoiding autoimmunity? Trends Ecol Evol. 2006;21(1):22–8. 
14. Koonin EV, Wolf YI. Is evolution Darwinian or/and Lamarckian? Biol Direct. 
2009;4:42. 
15. Barber GN. Host defense, viruses and apoptosis. Cell Death Differ. 2001;8 
(2):113–26. 
16. Koonin EV, Aravind L. Origin and evolution of eukaryotic apoptosis: the 
bacterial connection. Cell Death Differ. 2002;9(4):394–404. 
17. Ameisen JC. On the origin, evolution, and nature of programmed cell death: 
a timeline of four billion years. Cell Death Differ. 2002;9(4):367–93. 
18. Labbe K, Saleh M. Cell death in the host response to infection. Cell Death 
Differ. 2008;15(9):1339–49. 
19. Upton JW, Chan FK. Staying alive: cell death in antiviral immunity. Mol Cell. 
2014;54(2):273–80. 
20. Vasu K, Nagaraja V. Diverse functions of restriction-modification systems in 
addition to cellular defense. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2013;77(1):53–72. 
21. Swarts DC, Makarova K, Wang Y, Nakanishi K, Ketting RF, Koonin EV, et al. 
The evolutionary journey of Argonaute proteins. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 
2014;21(9):743–53. 
22. Chen P, Jeannotte R, Weimer BC. Exploring bacterial epigenomics in the 
next-generation sequencing era: a new approach for an emerging frontier. 
Trends Microbiol. 2014;22(5):292–300. 
23. Makarova KS, Haft DH, Barrangou R, Brouns SJ, Charpentier E, Horvath P, 
et al. Evolution and classification of the CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2011;9(6):467–77. 
24. Barrangou R. CRISPR-Cas systems and RNA-guided interference. Wiley 
Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2013;4(3):267–78. 
25. Barrangou R, Marraffini LA. CRISPR-Cas systems: Prokaryotes upgrade to 
adaptive immunity. Mol Cell. 2014;54(2):234–44. 
26. Gerdes K, Christensen SK, Lobner-Olesen A. Prokaryotic toxin-antitoxin stress 
response loci. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2005;3(5):371–82. 
27. Van Melderen L, Saavedra De Bast M. Bacterial toxin-antitoxin systems: more 
than selfish entities? PLoS Genet. 2009;5(3):e1000437. 
28. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. Comprehensive comparative-genomic 
analysis of type 2 toxin-antitoxin systems and related mobile stress 
response systems in prokaryotes. Biol Direct. 2009;4:19. 
29. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Snir S, Koonin EV. Defense islands in bacterial and 
archaeal genomes and prediction of novel defense systems. J Bacteriol. 
2011;193(21):6039–56. 
30. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. The basic building blocks and evolution of 
CRISPR-cas systems. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013;41(6):1392–400. 
31. Koonin EV, Makarova KS. CRISPR-Cas: evolution of an RNA-based adaptive 
immunity system in prokaryotes. RNA Biol. 2013;10(5):679–86. 
32. Frank SA. Inducible defence and the social evolution of herd immunity. 
Proc Biol Sci. 1998;265(1408):1911–3. 
33. Frank SA. Specific and non-specific defense against parasitic attack. J Theor 
Biol. 2000;202(4):283–304. 
34. Andre JB, Ferdy JB, Godelle B. Within-host parasite dynamics, emerging 
trade-off, and evolution of virulence with immune system. Evolution. 
2003;57(7):1489–97. 
35. Alizon S, van Baalen M. Multiple infections, immune dynamics, and the 
evolution of virulence. Am Nat. 2008;172(4):E150–168. 
36. Weinberger AD, Wolf YI, Lobkovsky AE, Gilmore MS, Koonin EV. Viral 
diversity threshold for adaptive immunity in prokaryotes. MBio. 2012;3(6): 
e00456–00412. 
37. Iranzo J, Lobkovsky AE, Wolf YI, Koonin EV. Evolutionary dynamics of the 
prokaryotic adaptive immunity system CRISPR-Cas in an explicit ecological 
context. J Bacteriol. 2013;195(17):3834–44. 
38. Lennon JT, Khatana SA, Marston MF, Martiny JB. Is there a cost of virus 
resistance in marine cyanobacteria? ISME J. 2007;1(4):300–12. 
39. Quance MA, Travisano M. Effects of temperature on the fitness cost of 
resistance to bacteriophage T4 in Escherichia coli. Evolution. 2009;63 
(6):1406–16. 
40. Palmer KL, Gilmore MS. Multidrug-resistant enterococci lack CRISPR-cas. 
MBio. 2010;1(4):e00227–10. 
41. Koskella B, Lin DM, Buckling A, Thompson JN. The costs of evolving 
resistance in heterogeneous parasite environments. Proc Biol Sci. 2012;279 
(1735):1896–903. 
42. Weinberger AD, Gilmore MS. CRISPR-Cas: to take up DNA or not-that is the 
question. Cell Host Microbe. 2012;12(2):125–6. 
43. Jiang W, Maniv I, Arain F, Wang Y, Levin BR, Marraffini LA. Dealing with the 
evolutionary downside of CRISPR immunity: bacteria and beneficial 
plasmids. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003844. 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page 13 of 14 

/*** End Page =12= ***/
/*** Page =13= ***/
44. Heilmann S, Sneppen K, Krishna S. Coexistence of phage and bacteria on 
the boundary of self-organized refuges. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109 
(31):12828–33. 
45. Debarre F, Lion S, van Baalen M, Gandon S. Evolution of host life-history traits 
in a spatially structured host-parasite system. Am Nat. 2012;179(1):52–63. 
46. Fukuyo M, Sasaki A, Kobayashi I. Success of a suicidal defense strategy 
against infection in a structured habitat. Sci Rep. 2012;2:238. 
47. Restif O, Koella JC. Concurrent evolution of resistance and tolerance to 
pathogens. Am Nat. 2004;164(4):E90–102. 
48. Nunez JK, Kranzusch PJ, Noeske J, Wright AV, Davies CW, Doudna JA. 
Cas1-Cas2 complex formation mediates spacer acquisition during 
CRISPR-Cas adaptive immunity. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014;21(6):528–34. 
49. He F, Chen L, Peng X. First Experimental Evidence for the Presence of a 
CRISPR Toxin in Sulfolobus. J Mol Biol. 2014;426(22):3683–8. 
50. Greischar MA, Koskella B. A synthesis of experimental work on parasite local 
adaptation. Ecol Lett. 2007;10(5):418–34. 
51. Vos M, Birkett PJ, Birch E, Griffiths RI, Buckling A. Local adaptation of 
bacteriophages to their bacterial hosts in soil. Science. 2009;325(5942):833. 
52. Hargreaves KR, Flores CO, Lawley TD, Clokie MR. Abundant and diverse 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat spacers in 
Clostridium difficile strains and prophages target multiple phage types 
within this pathogen. MBio. 2014;5(5):e01045–01013. 
53. Samson JE, Magadan AH, Sabri M, Moineau S. Revenge of the phages: 
defeating bacterial defences. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013;11(10):675–87. 
54. Hamilton WD. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I. J Theor Biol. 
1964;7(1):1–16. 
55. Griffin AS, West SA, Buckling A. Cooperation and competition in pathogenic 
bacteria. Nature. 2004;430(7003):1024–7. 
56. Nowak MA, Tarnita CE, Antal T. Evolutionary dynamics in structured 
populations. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010;365(1537):19–30. 
57. Chao L, Levin BR. Structured habitats and the evolution of anticompetitor 
toxins in bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981;78(10):6324–8. 
58. Lion S, Baalen M. Self-structuring in spatial evolutionary ecology. Ecol Lett. 
2008;11(3):277–95. 
59. Kummerli R, Griffin AS, West SA, Buckling A, Harrison F. Viscous medium 
promotes cooperation in the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Proc Biol Sci. 2009;276(1672):3531–8. 
60. Refardt D, Bergmiller T, Kummerli R. Altruism can evolve when relatedness is 
low: evidence from bacteria committing suicide upon phage infection. Proc 
Biol Sci. 2013;280(1759):20123035. 
61. Dimitriu T, Lotton C, Benard-Capelle J, Misevic D, Brown SP, Lindner AB, 
et al. Genetic information transfer promotes cooperation in bacteria. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(30):11103–8. 
62. Lion S, Boots M. Are parasites ''prudent'' in space? Ecol Lett. 2010;13(10):1245–55. 
63. Hay S, Kannourakis G. A time to kill: viral manipulation of the cell death 
program. J Gen Virol. 2002;83(Pt 7):1547–64. 
64. Postigo A, Ferrer PE. Viral inhibitors reveal overlapping themes in regulation 
of cell death and innate immunity. Microbes Infect. 2009;11(13):1071–8. 
65. Agol VI, Gmyl AP. Viral security proteins: counteracting host defences. Nat 
Rev Microbiol. 2010;8(12):867–78. 
66. Kaufmann G. Anticodon nucleases. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000;25(2):70–4. 
67. van Baalen M. Coevolution of recovery ability and virulence. Proc Biol Sci. 
1998;265(1393):317–25. 
68. Roy BA, Kirchner JW. Evolutionary dynamics of pathogen resistance and 
tolerance. Evolution. 2000;54(1):51–63. 
69. Dupuis ME, Villion M, Magadan AH, Moineau S. CRISPR-Cas and 
restriction-modification systems are compatible and increase phage 
resistance. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2087. 
70. Atkinson S, Williams P. Quorum sensing and social networking in the 
microbial world. J R Soc Interface. 2009;6(40):959–78. 
71. Hartmann A, Schikora A. Quorum sensing of bacteria and trans-kingdom 
interactions of N-acyl homoserine lactones with eukaryotes. J Chem Ecol. 
2012;38(6):704–13. 
72. Kovacs AT. Impact of spatial distribution on the development of mutualism 
in microbes. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:649. 
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission 
• Thorough peer review 
• No space constraints or color gure charges 
• Immediate publication on acceptance 
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar 
• Research which is freely available for redistribution 
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit 
Iranzo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:43 
Page 14 of 14 

/*** End Page =13= ***/
