/*** Page =0= ***/
ARTICLE 
Received 16 Oct 2015 | Accepted 8 Mar 2016 | Published 14 Apr 2016 
A geometrical approach to control and 
controllability of nonlinear dynamical networks 
Le-Zhi Wang1, Ri-Qi Su1, Zi-Gang Huang1,2, Xiao Wang3, Wen-Xu Wang1,4, Celso Grebogi5 & Ying-Cheng Lai1,6,7 
In spite of the recent interest and advances in linear controllability of complex networks, 
controlling nonlinear network dynamics remains an outstanding problem. Here we develop an 
experimentally feasible control framework for nonlinear dynamical networks that exhibit 
multistability. The control objective is to apply parameter perturbation to drive the system 
from one attractor to another, assuming that the former is undesired and the latter is desired. 
To make our framework practically meaningful, we consider restricted parameter perturbation 
by imposing two constraints: it must be experimentally realizable and applied only 
temporarily. We introduce the concept of attractor network, which allows us to formulate a 
quantiﬁable controllability framework for nonlinear dynamical networks: a network is more 
controllable if the attractor network is more strongly connected. We test our control 
framework using examples from various models of experimental gene regulatory networks 
and demonstrate the beneﬁcial role of noise in facilitating control. 
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 OPEN 
1 School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, 650 E. Tyler Mall, Tempe, Arizona 85287-5706, USA. 2 Institute of 
Computational Physics and Complex Systems, Lanzhou University, 222 S. Tianshui Road, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China. 3 School of Biological and Health 
Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, 621 E. Tyler Mall, Tempe, Arizona 85287-9709, USA. 4 School of Systems Science, Beijing Normal University, 
19 Xinjiekou Outer Street, Beijing, 100875, China. 5 Institute for Complex Systems and Mathematical Biology, King s College, Meston Walk, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK. 6 Institute for Complex Systems and Mathematical Biology, King s College, University of Aberdeen, Meston Walk, 
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK. 7 Department of Physics, Arizona State University, 550 E Tyler Drive, Tempe, Arizona 85287-1504, USA. Correspondence and 
requests for materials should be addressed to Y.-C.L. (email: Ying-Cheng.Lai@asu.edu). 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
1 

/*** End Page =0= ***/
/*** Page =1= ***/
Nonlinear dynamical processes are ubiquitous in natural 
and engineering systems. Signiﬁcant difﬁculties arise 
when such processes are coupled with the complex 
network topology, especially in terms of control. In spite of 
progress in understanding, analysing and predicting the beha- 
viours of large complex networks, to formulate an effective 
framework to control nonlinear dynamical networks has 
remained to be an outstanding problem in interdisciplinary 
research. 
In recent years, the traditional control and graph theories have 
been exploited to determine the linear controllability of complex 
networks1–9. The efforts have led to a quantitative understanding 
of the interplay between controllability and network structure. In 
particular, in the structural controllability framework1, the 
concept of maximum matching was proposed to determine and 
quantify whether a directed complex network can be driven from 
an arbitrary initial state to any desired state in ﬁnite time. It was 
found that the degree distribution of the network is critical to its 
controllability1. Subsequently, an alternative framework, the exact 
controllability framework2, was developed to extend the linear 
controllability analysis to networks with arbitrary structures and 
link weight distributions. In this framework, one uses the 
principle of maximum geometrical multiplicity of the network 
spectrum to determine the minimum set of driver nodes required 
to fully control the network. The mathematical underpinning of 
the structural and exact controllability frameworks is the classic 
Kalman s rank condition10, whose applicability is limited to linear 
dynamical networks. Nonlinear control theory based on the Lie 
brackets11 and a recent work to extend the linear controllability 
and observability theory to nonlinear networks with symmetry9 
notwithstanding, to establish a general mathematical controllability 
framework for complex and nonlinear dynamical networks appear 
not realistic at the present. 
Owing to the high dimensionality of nonlinear dynamical 
networks and the rich variety of behaviours that they entail, it 
may be prohibitively difﬁcult to develop a control framework that 
is universally applicable to different kinds of network dynamics. 
In particular, the classic deﬁnition of linear controllability, that is, 
a network system is controllable if it can be driven from an 
arbitrary initial state to an arbitrary ﬁnal state in ﬁnite time, is 
generally not applicable to nonlinear dynamical networks. 
Instead, controlling collective dynamical behaviours may be 
feasible12,13. Our idea is that, for nonlinear dynamical networks, 
control strategies may need to be speciﬁc and system dependent. 
The purpose of this paper is to articulate control strategies and 
develop a controllability framework for nonlinear networks that 
exhibit multistability. A deﬁning characteristic of such systems is 
that there are multiple coexisting attractors in the phase 
space14–16. The goal is to drive the system from one attractor 
to another using physically meaningful, temporary and ﬁnite 
parameter perturbation, assuming that the system is likely to 
evolve into an undesired state (attractor) or the system is already 
in such a state and one wishes to implement control to bring the 
system out of the undesired state and steer it into a desired one. 
In biology, nonlinear dynamical networks with multiple 
attractors have been employed to understand fundamental 
phenomena such as cancer emergence17, cell fate 
differentiation18–21 and cell cycle control22,23. For example, 
Boolean network models were used to study gene evolution24, 
attractor number variation with asynchronous stochastic 
updating25 and gene expression in the state space19. Another 
approach is to abstract key regulation genetic networks26,27 (or 
motifs) from all associated interactions, and to employ synthetic 
biology to modify, control and ﬁnally understand the biological 
mechanisms within these complicated systems18,22. An earlier 
application of this approach led to a good understanding of the 
ubiquitous phenomenon of bistability in biological systems28, 
where there are typically limit cycle attractors and, during cell 
cycle control, noise can trigger a differentiation process by driving 
the system from a limit circle to another steady-state attractor18. 
Generally, there are two candidate mechanisms for transition or 
switching between different attractors20: through signals 
transmitted within cells and noise, which were demonstrated 
recently using synthetic genetic circuits29. More recently, a 
detailed numerical study revealed how signal-induced 
bifurcations in a tri-stable genetic circuit can lead to transitions 
among different cell types21. 
In this paper, we develop a control and controllability 
framework for nonlinear dynamical networks based on the 
concept of attractor networks30. An attractor network is deﬁned 
in the phase space of the underlying nonlinear system, in which 
each node represents an attractor and a directed edge from one 
node to another indicates that the system can be driven from the 
former to the latter using experimentally feasible, temporary and 
ﬁnite parameter changes. A well-connected attractor network 
implies a strong feasibility that the system can be controlled to 
reach a desired attractor. The connectivity of the attractor 
network can then be used to characterize the controllability of the 
original nonlinear dynamical network. More speciﬁcally, for a 
given pair of attractors, the relative weight of the shortest path is 
the number of accessible control parameters whose adjustments 
can lead to the attractor transition as speciﬁed by the path. We 
use gene regulatory networks (GRNs) to demonstrate the 
practicality of our control framework, which includes low- 
dimensional, experimentally realizable synthetic gene circuits 
and a realistic T-cell cancer network of 60 nodes. A ﬁnding is that 
noise can facilitate control by reducing the required amplitude of 
the control signal. We emphasize that the development of our 
nonlinear control framework is based entirely on physical 
considerations, rendering feasible experimental validation. 
Results 
A complex, nonlinear dynamical network of N variables can be 
described by a set of N-coupled differential equations: 
.x Fx 
;m; 
1 
where xARN denotes the N-dimensional state variable, F(x, m)is 
the nonlinear vector ﬁeld and mARM represents the set of 
coupling parameters. In a GRN, the nodal dynamics is typically 
one-dimensional. For simplicity, we assume that this is the case to 
be treated so that the size of the network represented by 
equation (1) is N. From consideration of realistic GRNs, we 
assume that the coupling parameters can be adjusted externally, 
which are effectively the set of control parameters. Speciﬁcally, for 
a GRN, we assume that the various coupling strengths among the 
nodes (genes) can be experimentally and systematically varied 
through application of speciﬁc targeted drugs. On a larger scale, 
the fate of a cell can be controlled by adding drugs to the cell- 
growth environment, which adjust the interaction parameters in 
the underlying network28. Although dynamical variables 
themselves can also be perturbed for the purpose of control, for 
GRNs this is unrealistic. For this reason, the scenario of 
perturbing dynamical variables will not be considered in this 
paper. 
We focus on nonlinear dynamical networks with multiple 
coexisting attractors. For a given set of parameters m, the multiple 
attractors (for example, stable steady states) and the correspond- 
ing basins are ﬁxed. In the absence of stochasticity, for a given 
initial condition, the system will approach one of the attractors. 
Each attractor has speciﬁc biological signiﬁcance, which can be 
regarded as either desired or undesired, depending on the 
particular function of interest. Suppose, without any control, the 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
2 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 

/*** End Page =1= ***/
/*** Page =2= ***/
system is in an undesired attractor or is in its basin of attraction. 
The question is how to steer the system from the undesired state 
to a desired state by means of temporary and small parameter 
variations that are experimentally feasible. 
Control principle based on bifurcation. To motivate the 
development of a feasible control principle, we consider the 
simple case where the system is near a bifurcation point and 
control is to be applied to drive the system from one attractor to 
another through temporal perturbation to a single parameter. 
That is, the parameter variation is turned on and takes effect for a 
ﬁnite (typically short) duration of time. After control perturba- 
tion is withdrawn, the system is restored to its parameter setting 
before control but its state has been changed: the system will have 
moved to the basin of the desired attractor and will approach the 
desired attractor spontaneously. Let m0 be the initial parameter 
value and the system is in an undesired attractor denoted as xi , 
and let xf be the desired attractor to which the system is driven. 
Imposing control means that we change the parameter from m0 to 
m1. The dynamical mechanism to drive the system out of the 
initial attractor is bifurcations, for example, a saddle-node 
bifurcation at which the original attractor disappears and its basin 
is absorbed into that of an intermediate attractor23, denoted as xk . 
Turning on control to change m from m0 to m1 thus makes the 
system approach xk . This process continues until the system falls 
into the original basin of xf , at which point the control parameter 
is reset to its original value m0 so that the system will approach the 
desired attractor xf . Success of control relies on the existence of a 
path from the initial attractor to the ﬁnal one through a number 
of intermediate attractors. If a single parameter is unable to 
establish such a path, variations in multiple parameters can be 
considered, provided that such parameter adjustments are 
experimentally realizable. For a biological network, this can be 
achieved through application of a combined set of drugs31,32. 
However, even when potential complications induced by inter- 
drug interactions are neglected, the search space for suitable 
parameter perturbation can be prohibitively large if we allow all 
available parameters to be adjusted simultaneously. We 
demonstrate below that this challenge can be met by 
constructing an attractor network for the underlying system. 
We note that not only is it now feasible to perturb gene 
expressions directly but also the technology for ﬁne-tuning 
regulation strengths has become commonly available. For 
example, in our previous synthetic biology studies29,33, we used 
chemical inducers such as aTc, isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactoside and 
Arabinose to ﬁne tune the strength of inhibition or activation. 
These chemical inducers do not change the protein abundance 
but rather chemically modify the protein structures upon binding 
so as to change their functions including the binding afﬁnity. 
Other techniques such as RNA interference can also be used to 
ﬁne-tune the gene regulation strength. In general, there are many 
different ways to tune gene regulation without chaining its 
transcription and translation. 
Attractor network for the T-cell signalling network. For a 
complex, nonlinear dynamical network, an attractor network can 
be constructed by deﬁning each of all possible attractors of the 
system as a node. There exists a directed link from one node to 
another if an experimentally accessible parameter of the system 
can be adjusted to drive or control the system from the former to 
the latter. There can be multiple edges from one node to another, 
if there are multiple parameters, each enabling control. Starting 
from an initial attractor, one can identify, using all accessible 
parameters with variations in a physically reasonable range, a set 
of attractors that the system can be driven into. Repeating this 
procedure for all attractors in the system, we build up an attractor 
network that provides a blueprint for driving the whole net- 
worked system from any attractor to any other attractor in the 
Inhibition 
Identified inhibition 
Identified activation 
Activation 
C1 
C2 
N 
S1P 
SPHK1 
PDGF 
PDGFR 
SMAD 
ERK 
CREB NFAT 
FasL 
DISC 
A20 
TNF 
TRADD 
IAP 
P27 
Proliferation 
RANTES 
IL2RA 
IFNGT 
IL2 
GZMB 
NFKB 
FLIP 
MCL1 
PLCG1 
RAS 
GAP 
MEK 
FYN 
LCK 
Stimuli 
JAK 
SOCS 
STAT3 
IL2RAT BID 
Apoptosis 
TAX 
TPL2 
FasT 
sFas 
GRB2 
IL2RBT 
TBET 
ZAP70 
IL2RB 
IL15 
IFNG 
GPCR 
Fas 
Ceramide 
PI3K 
CTLA4 
TCR 
CD45 
Stimuli2 
P2 
Caspase 
BclxL 
Cytoskeleton signalling 
a 
b 
Figure 1 | T-cell survival signalling network and its attractor network. (a) Structure of T-cell survival network: each node is labelled with its generic name, 
and the arrowhead and diamond-head edges represent activation and inhibition regulations, respectively. The inhibitory edges from Apoptosis to other 
nodes are not shown (for clarity). (b) Attractor network of the T-cell network, which contains three nodes: two cancerous states denoted as C1 and C2 and a 
normal state denoted as N. The two directed edges in the attractor network are multiple, each containing altogether 48 individual edges corresponding to 
controlling the 48 edges in the original network, which are indicated by the dark dashed lines, whereas the remaining edges in the original network are 
signiﬁed by the light solid lines. Our detailed computations reveal that parameter perturbation on any one of the 48 edges can drive the system from a 
cancerous state to the normal state. That is, regardless of whether the initial state is C1 or C2, with a proper modiﬁcation to one of the 48 parameters, the 
system can be driven to the normal state N. 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
3 

/*** End Page =2= ***/
/*** Page =3= ***/
system, assuming at the time that the latter attractor would lead 
to desired function of the system as a whole. As we demonstrate 
below, all these can be done using relatively small parameter 
perturbation in the sense that the modiﬁcations are small as 
compared with the ranges over which the corresponding para- 
meters can vary. 
To demonstrate the construction of attractor networks, we take 
as an example a realistic biological network, T cells in large 
granular lymphocyte leukaemia associated with blood cancer. 
Speciﬁcally, apoptosis signalling of the T cells can be described by 
a network model: T-cell survival signalling network34,35, which 
has 60 nodes and 195 regulatory edges, as shown in Fig. 1a. Nodes 
in the network represent proteins and transcripts, and the edges 
correspond to either activation or inhibitory regulations. 
Experimentally, it was found that there are three attractors for 
this biophysically detailed network34,35. Among the three 
attractors, two correspond to two distinct cancerous states 
(denoted as C1 and C2) and one is associated with the normal 
state (denoted as N). The two cancerous states are biologically 
equivalent, differing only on node P2 (either activated or 
inactivated). As the T cells in large granular lymphocyte 
leukemia disease originate from the failure of the programmed 
T cells, the normal state corresponds to the situation where the 
node Apoptosis is activated while all other nodes are inactivated. 
By translating the Boolean rules into a continuous form using the 
method described in refs 36,37 and setting the strength of each 
edge to unity, one can obtain a set of nonlinear differential 
equations for the entire network system. Direct simulation of the 
model indicates that there are three stable ﬁxed point attractors, 
in agreement with the experimental observation34,35. The 
attractor network is thus quite simple: it has three nodes only, 
as shown in Fig. 1b. Testing all the 195 experimentally adjustable 
parameters, we ﬁnd 48 edges from each cancerous attractor to the 
normal one (see Supplementary Table 1 for details). Our detailed 
computations reveal that parameter perturbation on any one of 
the 48 edges can drive the system from a cancerous state to the 
normal state. That is, regardless of whether the initial state is C1 
or C2, with a proper modiﬁcation to one of the 48 parameters, the 
system can be driven to the normal state N. We note that 
parameter perturbation does exist to drive the system from the 
normal state to a cancerous state (see Supplementary Note 1 for 
details). 
Control implementation based on attractor network. Given a 
nonlinear dynamical network in the real (physical) space, the 
underlying phase space dimension may be quite high, rendering 
analysis of the dynamical behaviours difﬁcult. The attractor 
network is a coarse grained representation of the phase space, 
retaining information that is most relevant to the control task of 
driving the network system to a desired ﬁnal state. Once an 
attractor network has been constructed, actual control can be 
carried out through temporary changes in a set of experimentally 
adjustable parameters. This should be contrasted to one existing 
approach38 that requires accurate adjustments in the state 
variables, which may not always be realistic. 
We detail how actual control can be implemented based on the 
attractor network for the T-cell system. To be concrete, we 
assume that the control signal has the shape of a rectangular pulse 
in the plot of a parameter versus time, as shown in Fig. 2a, where 
the control parameter is m and the rectangular pulse has duration 
t and amplitude Dm mn m0 
jj 
, with m0 denoting the nominal 
t 
n 
0 
c 
∆c 
∆e 
∆n 
a 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
00.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 
0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
n 
n 
c 
c 
∆e 
m
m
m
102 
101 
100 
m
102 
101 
100 
10–3 10–2 10–1 100 
∆e 
10–2 10–1 100 
bc 
Figure 2 | Relationship between edge control strength and minimal control time. For the T-cell network, (a) an inverted rectangular control signal of 
duration t and amplitude Dmn mn m0 
jj 
, where m0 is the original parameter value and mn is the control parameter value. A saddle-node bifurcation occurs 
for m mc,soDe mc mn is the excessive amount of the parameter change over the critical value mc.(b,c) Minimal control time tm versus mn, where 
parameter control is applied to the activation edge from node S1P to node PDGFR and to the inhibitory edge from DISC to MCL1 , respectively. These 
four nodes are indicated with the solid black circles in Fig. 1a. The corresponding plots on a logarithmic scale in the insets of (b,c) suggest a power-law 
scaling behaviour between tm and De (equation (2)). The ﬁtted power-law scaling exponents are bE 0.44 and 0.55, respectively, for (b,c). 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
4 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 

/*** End Page =3= ***/
/*** Page =4= ***/
parameter value and mn being the value during the time interval 
when control is on. For the T-cell network, we set m0 1.0. As m 
is reduced, the system approaches a bifurcation point. (In other 
examples, a bifurcation can be reached by increasing a control 
parameter, as in the low-dimensional GRNs detailed in the 
Methods.) Extensive numerical simulations show that, to control 
the T-cell network from a cancerous state (C1 or C2) to the 
normal state N, there are wide ranges of choices for Dm and t.In 
fact, once mn is decreased through the bifurcation point mc at 
which the initial attractor loses its stability, the goal of control can 
be realized. The critical value mc for each parameter can be 
identiﬁed from the bifurcation analysis. In addition, for mnomc, 
there exists a required minimum control time tm , over which the 
system will move into the original basin of the target attractor 
before control is activated. Insofar as t4tm , one does not need 
longer duration of control as the system will evolve into the target 
attractor following its natural dynamical evolution with the 
nominal parameter m0. The value of tm increases as mn is closer to 
mc, where if mn mc, tm is inﬁnite due to the critical slowing down 
at the bifurcation point mc. Figure 2b,c show, respectively, for the 
T-cell network, the relationship between tm and mn when 
controlling the strength of the activation edge from the node 
S1P to the node PDGFR , and that of the inhibitory edge from 
the node DISC to the node MCL1 (cf., Fig. 1a, the nodes 
denoted as black circles and connected by bold coupling edges). 
The critical value mc (indicated by the dotted line) can be 
estimated accordingly. The insets in Fig. 2b and c show the 
corresponding plots of the relationships on a double logarithmic 
scale, with the horizontal axis to be De mc mn, the exceeded 
value of mn over the critical point mc. We observe the following 
power-law scaling behaviour: 
tm amn mc 
jj 
b aDe 
jj 
b; 
2 
where b is the scaling exponent. The upper right region in the 
plane of the control parameters over the curve of tm De , that is, 
the region with larger De value or longer duration t, corresponds 
to the case where control is successful in the sense that the system 
can deﬁnitely be driven to the desired ﬁnal state. 
The power-law scaling relation for tm demonstrated in 
Fig. 2b,c for the T-cell network is quite general, as it also holds 
for two-node and three-node GRNs (see the Methods). For the 
T-cell system, the critical values of parameters for all the possible 
controllable edges from C1 or C2 to N, and the corresponding 
values of a and b in equation (2) are provided in Supplementary 
Table 1 and Supplementary Note 1. The control magnitude and 
time for some parameters are identical, for the reason that the 
logic relationship from the corresponding edges to the same node 
can be described as AND (c.f. Fig. 1) so that in the continuous- 
time differential equation model, all these in-edges are equivalent. 
(The control results for the two-node and three-node GRNs 
between any pair of nearest-neighbour attractors are listed in 
Supplementary Tables 2 and 3, respectively.) 
Owing to the ﬂexibility in choosing the control signal, our 
control scheme based on the attractor network is amenable to 
experimental implementation. We can also assign weights to the 
shortest paths in the attractor network. For example, if we assume 
all the links are equally implementable (Supplementary Table 1), 
the path from the C state to the N state involving any one of 
IL2RB, STAT3, NF-kB, PI3K or apoptosis to MCL1 has a 
relatively larger weight, representing the relatively more efﬁcient 
control protocol as the required parameter change De can be 
minimized. 
Beneﬁcial role of noise in control. More than three decades of 
intense research in nonlinear dynamical systems has led to great 
knowledge about the role of noise, in terms of phenomena such as 
stochastic resonance39,40, coherence resonance41,42, noise-induced 
chaos16 and noise-induced state transitions43. Common to all these 
phenomena is that a proper amount of noise can in fact be 
beneﬁcial, for example, for optimizing the signal-to-noise ratio, for 
enhancing the signal regularity or temporal coherence, or for 
facilitating the transitions among the attractors. As our control 
mechanism is to make the system leave an undesired attractor and 
approach a desired one, noise in combination with parameter 
adjustments can facilitate the process of escaping from an attractor. 
To demonstrate this, we assume that the T-cell network is subject 
to Gaussian noise, which can be modelled by adding independent 
normal distribution terms N(0, s2) to the system equations, where 
s is the noise amplitude. We ﬁnd that, with noise, the required 
magnitude of parameter change can be reduced. In fact, even when 
the controlled parameter mn has not yet reached the bifurcation 
point mc, noise can lead to a ﬁnite probability for the system to 
escape the basin of the undesired attractor. We note that, in a 
recent work on stochastic control43, a method was presented to 
switch the dynamical states. In a real experimental setting, there 
can be different sources of noise such as temperature and metabolic 
burden. In our parametric control method, the control signals are 
ﬂexible with adjustable duration and amplitude, and noise can 
enhance the ﬂexibility. 
Suppose the control parameter is set to the value mn, which is 
insufﬁcient to induce escape from the undesired attractor in the 
absence of noise. When noise is present, the system dynamics is 
stochastic. To characterize the control performance, we carry out 
independent simulations starting from one cancerous state, for 
10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 
10−5 
10−4 
10−3 
10−2 
10−1 
10−1 
10−3 
10−1 
10−2 
10−4 
10−5 
10−4 
10−3 
10−2 
0 
0.5 
1 
∆d 
Probability of reaching normal state
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
Probability of reaching
normal state
∆d
b 
a 
Figure 3 | The beneﬁt of noise in controlling the T-cell network. (a) Success rate to control the T-cell network from the cancerous state C1 to the normal 
state N using a combination of parameter perturbation and external noise (of amplitude) s, where Dd mn mc is the parameter deﬁciency. Warm colours 
indicate higher probability values of successful control. The perturbation duration is t 200. The results are averaged over 1,000 realizations. (b) A three- 
dimensional plot: success rate versus Dd and s. 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
5 

/*** End Page =4= ***/
/*** Page =5= ***/
example, C1, but with insufﬁcient control strength as character- 
ized by the deﬁciency parameter Dd mn mc, and calculate the 
probability P of control success through the number of trials that 
the system can be successfully driven to the normal state N. 
Figure 3a shows, on a double logarithmic scale, the values of P in 
the parameter plane of s and Dd, where the control parameter is 
the strength of the activation edge from node S1P to node 
PDGFR in the T-cell network. A three-dimensional plot of P 
versus s and Dd is shown in Fig. 3b. We see that, for ﬁxed s, P 
decreases with Dd but, for any ﬁxed value of Dd, the probability P 
increases with s, indicating the beneﬁcial role of noise in 
facilitating control. In the parameter plane, there exists a well- 
deﬁned boundary, below which the control probability assumes 
large values but above which the probability is near zero. Testing 
alternative control parameters yields essentially the same results, 
because of the simplicity of the attractor network for the T-cell 
system and the multiple directed edges from each cancerous state 
to the normal state. 
Discussions 
In nonlinear dynamics, controlling chaos has been studied for 
more than two decades44–46. Success, however, has been limited 
to low-dimensional dynamical systems with a very few positive 
Lyapunov exponents. Complex, nonlinear dynamical networks 
are generally high dimensional. Although mathematical 
controllability frameworks for such high-dimensional systems1,2 
have been developed and extensively studied recently, the 
limitation is that the nodal dynamical processes must be 
assumed to be linear. 
Controllability and actual control are two key issues associated 
with controlling nonlinear dynamics on complex networks. To 
assess the controllability, drastically different approaches than the 
linear controllability frameworks are needed. Although there were 
previous works on methods such as pinning control12,47 through 
alteration of the state variables, in realistic situations such 
strategies may be difﬁcult to implement. Owing to the extremely 
diverse nonlinear dynamical behaviours that a network can 
generate, at the present there is no universal framework for actual 
control of complex networks with nonlinear dynamics through 
realistic perturbation. The mathematical control theory for linear 
dynamical systems aims to control the detailed states of all of the 
variables, which is in fact an overkill for most systems. For 
nonlinear dynamical networks, a physically meaningful approach 
may not require detailed control of all state variables. With this 
relaxation of the control requirement, it may be possible to 
develop a framework of controllability and devise actual control 
strategies for nonlinear dynamical networks based on physical/ 
experimental considerations. In particular, a common feature of 
nonlinear dynamical systems is the emergence of distinct, 
coexisting attractors16,48. Often the performance and functions 
of the system are determined by the particular attractor that the 
system has settled into, to which the detailed states of the 
dynamical variables are not relevant. The key is thus to develop 
control principles whereby we nudge a complex, nonlinear system 
from attractor to attractor through small perturbation to a set of 
physically or experimentally feasible parameters. The main 
message of this paper is that a controllability framework can be 
developed for nonlinear dynamical networks based on controlling 
attractors. 
Assuming that the networked system will evolve into an 
undesired attractor, the control goal is to apply perturbation to 
steer the system into a desired attractor. This can be 
accomplished by identifying a ﬁnal attractor leading to the 
desired performance and choosing a set of experimentally adjus- 
table parameters. If the perturbation can drive the system from 
the undesired state to the desired attractor, there exists a control 
path between the former and the latter, regardless of whether 
there are intermediate attractors on the path. Suppose we have 
found all the attractors of the system (see Supplementary Note 2 
for a systematic method). In terms of some speciﬁc performance 
criteria, we can classify the attractors as undesired, desired or 
intermediate. If there is a control path from any undesired 
attractor to the desired attractor, the networked system is deemed 
controllable. An attractor network can then be constructed, with 
nodes and edges being the attractors and control paths, 
respectively. The topology and properties of the attractor 
network, such as the network diameter and the total amount of 
the parameter perturbation, effectively quantify the controllability 
of the original network. We demonstrate our idea of control and 
construction of attractor networks using realistic networks from 
systems and synthetic biology. We also ﬁnd that noise can 
facilitate control of nonlinear dynamical networks, and we 
provide a physical understanding of this phenomenon (Methods). 
Our framework can be adopted to controlling nonlinear 
dynamical networks other than the GRNs. For example, for the 
Northern European power grid network recently studied49,a 
rewiring method was proposed and demonstrated to be able to 
enhance the system stability through the addition of extra 
transmission lines. For a power grid network, the synchronous 
states are desired, whereas other states, for example, limit cycles, 
are detrimental. Treating the link density (or number) as a 
tunable parameter, the minimum transfer capacity required for 
extra lines to realize the control can be estimated by our method. 
Another example is Boolean networks with discrete dynamics, for 
which a perturbation method was proposed based on 
modiﬁcation of the update rules to rescue the system from the 
undesired states50. In terms of our method, an attractor network 
can be constructed based on perturbation to multiple parameters 
to drive the system out of the undesired, damaged states towards 
a normal (desired) state. For biological systems, an epigenetic 
state network (ESN) approach was proposed51 to analyse the 
transitions among different phenotypic processes. In an ESN, 
nodes represent attractors and edges represent pathways between 
a pair of attractors. By construction, different parameter values 
would result in a different ESN. (See Supplementary Note 3 and 
Supplementary Fig. 2 for an example of using the principle of 
attractor network to control a stochastic, biochemical reaction 
network.) In our attractor network, nodes are attractors but edges 
are directed and represent controllable paths (through parameter 
perturbation) to drive the system from one attractor to another. 
At the present, it is difﬁcult to formulate a rigorous 
mathematical controllability framework for nonlinear dynamical 
networks. A challenge is that different parameter perturbation 
will typically lead to a different attractor network. Moreover, as 
the attractor network is directed and typically does not have an 
all-to-all coupling conﬁguration, multiple parameter perturbation 
may be needed to realize control (for example, as demonstrated 
using a three-node GRN system - see the Methods), rendering the 
amount of computation prohibitive for relatively large dynamical 
networks. Successfully addressing these issues will ultimately 
enable us to achieve the grand goal of controlling nonlinear 
dynamical networks. 
Methods 
Construction of attractor networks. For a system with known attractor basins 
and given initial and ﬁnal states, the attractor network can be constructed through 
the following steps. 
(1) Find all the parameters that can be adjusted externally and determine the 
possible range of variation of each tunable parameter based on experimental 
considerations and computational efﬁciency. For example, the T-cell network 
has 195 tunable parameters. Using the differential equation model one can test 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
6 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 

/*** End Page =5= ***/
/*** Page =6= ***/
each parameter separately to determine its range of variation that can drive the 
system from one attractor to another. (Testing different parameter combina- 
tions is computationally prohibitive.) 
(2) For a tunable parameter, choose a small set of values in its variable range, 
which include its original or nominal value. 
(3) Simulate the system dynamics for each parameter value, starting from the 
initial attractor and determine the ﬁnal attractor. Record the parameter values 
that can drive the system into the basin of the desired attractor. For example, 
for the T-cell network, parameter variations lead to saddle-node bifurcations, 
rendering applicable a straightforward bisecting algorithm to reduce the 
computational complexity in searching for the set of parameter values that 
result in a desired attractor. 
(4) An attractor network can be constructed after all tunable parameters have been 
tested, from which distinct control paths can be identiﬁed for any given pair of 
initial and ﬁnal attractors. (For the systems treated in this paper, the 
computational time required to construct the attractor network is listed in 
Supplementary Table 4.) 
For systems whose attractors are unknown a priori, it is necessary to execute an 
attractor ﬁnding algorithm before an attractor network can be reconstructed. An 
example of such an algorithm is presented in Supplementary Note 2. The issues of 
multiple parameter-based control and computational cost are discussed in 
Supplementary Notes 4 and 5, respectively. 
Bifurcation diagram. Bifurcation diagram represents a visualization method to 
characterize a system s steady-state behaviour with respect to parameter variation. 
In this paper, we used the MATCONT package in MATLAB to draw the bifur- 
cation diagrams52. The bifurcation curves in MATCONT are computed based on 
the numerical continuation algorithm with a predictor-corrector procedure to 
enhance the stability and reduce the computational time. For the two-node GRN 
example below, we calculate the bifurcation diagrams with respect to all four 
tunable parameters, based on which the attractor network can be constructed. 
A two-node GRN. In spite of the simplicity of its attractor network, the original 
T-cell network itself is still quite complicated from the point of view of nonlinear 
dynamical analysis. To have a better understanding of our control mechanism, we 
study GRNs of relatively low dimensions and carry out a detailed analysis of the 
associated attractor networks. 
We use a two-node GRN to understand the dynamical underpinning of the 
attractor network. As shown in Fig. 4a, the network contains two auto-activation 
nodes (genes) and together they form a mutual inhibitory circuit. Such a topology 
was shown to be responsible for the regulation of blood stem cell differentiation53. 
In addition, it is conceivable that such topologies can be constructed with tunable 
inputs using synthetic biology approaches29. 
In a typical experimental setting, four coupling parameters can be adjusted 
externally through the application of repressive or inductive drugs. To demonstrate 
attractor network and control implementation, we consider the parameter regime 
in which the system has four stable steady states (attractors) that correspond to 
four different cell states during cell development and differentiation. In particular, 
the dynamical network can be mathematically described as, 
_x1 a1 xn 
1 
sn xn 
1b1 sn 
sn xn 
2kx1; 
_x2 a2 xn 
2 
sn xn 
2b2 sn 
sn xn 
1kx2; 
3 
where the dynamical variables (x1, x2) characterize the protein abundances of the 
gene products, k denotes the degradation rate of each gene, and the tunable 
parameters a1, a2, b1 and b2 represent the strengths of auto or mutual regulations. 
In a GRN, the dynamical behaviours of inhibition and activation are captured by 
the Hill function: f(x) xn/(xn sn) for activation and f(x) sn/(xn sn) for 
inhibition, where the parameter s characterizes half activation (or inhibition) 
concentration (for x s, the output is 0.5), and n quantiﬁes the correlation between 
the input and output concentrations, with a larger value of n corresponding to a 
stronger inhibition or activation effect. For any speciﬁc GRN, the values of both s 
and n can be determined experimentally. For simplicity, we assume the system to 
00.511.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
a1 
a1 
b1 
b2 
a2 
t0 
t2 
t1 
00.511.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
a1=a10 
a1=a10 
a1=a1n 
a1=a1n 
a1=a10 
a1=a10 
00.511.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
0 
1 
2 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
0 
0.5 
1 
B 
B 
B’ 
A 
t0 
t1~t2 
t0~t1 
A 
X1 
X1 
X1 
X2
X2
X2
X2
X1 
a 
c 
def 
b 
(d,f) (e) 
t 
Figure 4 | Control of a GRN of two nodes. (a) Simpliﬁed model of the two-node GRN, where the arrowhead and bar-head edges represent activation and 
inhibition regulations, respectively, and the sawtooth lines denote the strength of the tunable edge. (b) Bifurcation diagram with respect to the control 
parameter a1, where the red and grey solid lines denote the stable and unstable steady states, respectively. In the two parallel cross-sections (with dashed 
line boundaries) for a1 a0 
1 and a1 an1 , the yellow and brown dots represent the corresponding stable attractors, respectively. (c) Control signals required to 
drive the system from attractor A to attractor B.Ind–f, grey dashed lines represent the basin boundaries; black solid circles and green crosses denote 
attractors and unstable steady states, respectively. (d) For the initial parameter setting, a1 a0 
1 , the system is at a low concentration state A, and the target 
state is B.(e) By changing a1 from a0 
1 to an1 , attractor A is destabilized and its original basin is absorbed into that of the intermediate attractor B0 , so the 
system approaches B0 .(f) When control perturbation upon a1 is released, the landscape recovers to that in d. Once the system has entered the basin of the 
target state B during the process in e it will evolve spontaneously towards B. Parameters in simulation are a0 
1 1:0,an1 1:4,t0 0,t1 23andt2 40. 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
7 

/*** End Page =6= ***/
/*** Page =7= ***/
be symmetric in that inhibition and activation share the same Hill function (that is, 
with the same parameters s and n). To have four attractors, we set the auto 
activation strengths, a1 and a2, to 1.0, and mutual inhibition strengths, b1 and b2,to 
0.2. The value of the degradation rate k is set to 1.1, taking into account the effects 
of protein degradation and cell volume expansion. 
Figure 4b–f shows a particular process of controlling the system from an initial 
state, denoted as A, in which both x1 and x2 have low abundance, to a ﬁnal state B 
where x1 and x2 have high and low abundance, respectively. From the bifurcation 
diagram (Fig. 4b) with respect to the control parameter a1, we see that, as a1 is 
increased from 1.0 to 1.4, in the lower branch the initial attractor A is destabilized 
through a saddle-node bifurcation. The control signal is shown in Fig. 4c, where the 
original and perturbed parameter values are denoted as a01 and an 
1 , respectively. The 
bifurcation-based control process is shown in Fig. 4d–f, where Fig 4d exhibits the 
phase space of the system before control (a1 1.0). When control is activated so 
that a1 is set to a1 1.4, the original basin of attractor A merges into the basin of an 
intermediate attractor B0 , and the system originally in A starts to migrate towards 
the intermediate attractor B0 , as indicated by the arrowed trajectory in Fig. 4e. 
Control perturbation upon a1 can be withdrawn once the system enters the region 
belonging to the original basin of the target attractor B, after which the system 
spontaneously evolves into B for a1 1.0, as shown in Fig. 4f. 
To obtain a global picture of all possible control outcomes, we construct the 
attractor network for the two-node GRN system, assuming that three parameters: 
a1, a2 and b2, are available for control. The corresponding bifurcation diagrams are 
shown in Fig. 5a–c, from which all saddle-node bifurcations can be identiﬁed for 
control design. When all the attractors are connected with directed and weighted 
edges through the control processes, that is, when none of the attractor is isolated, 
we obtain an attractor network, as shown in Fig. 5d. Speciﬁcally, the edge weight 
can be assigned by taking into account the key characteristics of control such as the 
critical parameter strength mc and the power-law scaling behaviour of the required 
minimum control time tm (see Supplementary Table 2 for details). From the 
attractor network, we can ﬁnd all possible control paths for any given pair of 
original and desired states. 
From Fig. 5d, we see that the two-node GRN system is fully controllable as any of 
the coexisting attractors is reachable through proper sequential controls to the available 
parameters. The concept of attractor network is appealing because it provides a clear 
control scenario to drive the system from any initial attractor to any desired attractor. In 
fact, the attractor network provides a blueprint that can be used to design a proper 
combination of parameter changes to induce the so-called synergistic or antagonistic 
effects54.Forexample,A is not directly connected with C, neither is B directly 
connected to D. However, the system can be steered from A to B through perturbation 
on a1,andthenfromB to C through a change in b2,asshowninFig.5e.Another 
example to demonstrate the need of multiple parameter perturbation is to control the 
system from B to D.AviablecontrolpathisB-C-D, which can be realized through 
perturbation on parameters (b2, a1). We also see that the two B-A-D paths can be 
realized through parameter changes in (a1, a2)and(a1, b2), respectively. A phase 
diagram illustrating how different choices of the parameters affect the ﬁnal attractor is 
provided in Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary Fig. 1. 
When multiple control paths exist from an initial attractor to a ﬁnal one, a 
practical issue is to identify the optimal path that is cost effective and robust. The 
concept of weighted-shortest path can be used to address this issue. Particularly, 
the weights of edges can be determined from experimental considerations such as 
the cost, limitation in drug dose, the control duration time and so on. 
Beneﬁcial role of noise in nonlinear control. The role of noise in facilitating 
control of a nonlinear dynamical network can be understood using the concept 
of potential landscape55–57 or Waddington landscape58 in systems biology, which 
essentially determines the biological paths for cell development and differentiation59,60. 
The potential landscape was used to manipulate time scales to control stochastic and 
induced switching in biophysical networks43,60. Intuitively, the power of the landscape 
concept can be understood by resorting to the elementary physical picture of a ball 
moving in a valley under gravity. The valley corresponds to one stable attractor. To the 
right of the valley there is a hill, or a potential barrier in the language of classical 
mechanics. The downhill side to the right of the barrier corresponds to a different 
attractor. Suppose the conﬁnement of ball s motion within the valley is undesired and 
one wishes to push the ball over the barrier to the right attractor (desired). If the barrier 
is high, there will be little probability for the ball to move across the top of the barrier 
towards the desired attractor. In this case, a small amount of noise is unable to enhance 
the crossover probability. However, if the barrier height is small, a small amount of 
noise can push the ball over to desired attractor on the right side of the barrier. Thus, 
the beneﬁcial role of noise is more pronounced for small height of the potential barrier, 
a behaviour that we observe when controlling the T-cell network (Fig. 3). In 
mechanics, the system can be formulated using a potential function so that, 
mathematically, the motion of the ball can be described by the Langevin equation, 
which has been a paradigmatic model to understand nonlinear phenomena such as 
stochastic resonance39,61,62. In the past few years, a quantitative approach has been 
developed to map out the potential landscape for gene circuits or GRNs55,63,64.In 
nonlinear dynamical systems, a similar concept exists—quasipotential65–67,which 
plays an important role in understanding phenomena such as noise-induced chaos. 
For an attractor network, in the presence of noise, each node corresponds to a 
potential valley of certain depth that characterizes the stability of the attractor. For 
a ﬁxed depth, noise of larger amplitude s leads a higher escaping probability or 
shorter escaping time. When the amplitude of the control signal is not sufﬁcient to 
drive the system across the local potential barrier, noise can facilitate control by 
pushing the system out of the undesired valley (attractor). 
The potential landscape for a GRN under Gaussian noise can be constructed 
from the dynamical equations of the system using the concept of pseudo energy57. 
For the two-node GRN system (equation (3)) subject to stochastic disturbance 
00.511.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
e 
d 
A 
D 
C 
B 
AtoB 
BtoC 
00 
a1 =a10 b2 =b20 
b2 =b2n 
b2 =b20 
a1 =a1n 
a1 =a10 
t 
t 
a1 
a2 
b2 
a 
b 
01 
23 
0 
1 
2 
3 
a 
D 
C 
A 
B 
a1 
x1
x1 
x2
012345 
0 
0.5 
1 
c 
B 
C 
D 
A 
b2 
x1
01 
23 
0 
0.5 
1 
b 
B 
A 
D 
C 
a2 
x1
Figure 5 | Attractor network construction for a GRN of two nodes. (a–c) Bifurcation diagrams with respect to the coupling parameters a1, a2 and b2, 
respectively, where each bifurcation point can be exploited to design control. (d) The corresponding attractor network, in which a directed edge 
corresponds to an elementary control that is designed to steer the system from the original attractor to the directed one. The solid and dashed edges, 
respectively, denote the positive and negative changes in the corresponding control parameters. (e) Sequential control signals required to drive the system 
from attractor A to attractor C through the path A-B-C. In simulation, the original parameter values are a0 
1 1:0andb0 
2 0:2. We set an1 1:4, followed by 
setting bn2 4:2, and the respective durations of the parameter perturbation are ta 23 and tb 32. 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
8 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 

/*** End Page =7= ***/
/*** Page =8= ***/
N(0, s2), we can compute the potential landscape for any combination of some 
system parameter (say a1) and the noise amplitude s. Figure 6a,b shows two 
examples of the landscape (in three-dimensional representation) for a1 1.0 and 
a1 1.3, where the noise amplitude is s 0.05. We see that, for example, for 
a1 1.0, there are four valleys (attractors). Figure 6c shows, for s 0.02, a two- 
dimensional representation of the pseudo-energy for a number of values of a1.We 
observe that, for a same noise amplitude, as a1 is increased, the transition rate from 
A to B becomes higher (the colour becomes warmer). 
What if the system is at an attractor that is deep in its basin and not close to the 
boundary? As our approach is based on parameter adjustment, such a case can still 
be effectively controlled in the sense that the system can be brought out of the 
attractor. For example, consider the attractor C for a1 1.5 in the two-node GRN 
system, which is deep inside its own basin, as shown in Fig. 6c. When parameter 
perturbation is applied to the system, its energy landscape and basin structure are 
changed (from top to bottom). Under control, the attractor moves towards the 
basin boundary and is destroyed when it reaches the boundary, thereby bringing 
the system out of this attractor. Another example is attractor A in Fig. 6c, where it 
can be seen that, when the control parameter a1 increases its value from 0.9 to 1.5, 
its basin changes and the attractor moves towards the boundary as well. Similar 
plots but for ﬁxed a1 1.3 and different values of s are shown in Fig. 6d. For 
a1 1.3, the pseudo energy for A (the original valley at the lower-left corner) 
becomes higher, and the path for the transition from A to B becomes more 
pronounced. Further increasing a1 towards the critical value (about 1.35) raises the 
energy of A to the level of the potential barrier, effectively eliminating the 
corresponding valley and the attractor itself. Note that, for a ﬁxed value of a1, 
increasing noise amplitude can lead to a mixture of cold colours, meaning that the 
valley range becomes wider and the ridge between two adjacent valleys becomes 
shallower, resulting in a higher transition probability for each attractor. 
A three-node GRN. We also study a three-node GRN system, as shown in Fig. 7a. 
Similar to the two-node GRN system, there exist both auto and mutual regulations 
among the nodes. All the interactions are assumed to be characterized by the same 
parameters, s and n, in the Hill function. The nonlinear dynamical equations of the 
system are26,68: 
_ 
x1a1xn 
1 
sn xn 
1b1sn 
sn xn 
2 
c1 sn 
sn xn 
3kx1; 
_ 
x2a2sn 
sn xn 
1b2xn 
2 
sn xn 
2 
c2 sn 
sn xn 
3kx2; 
_ 
x3a3sn 
sn xn 
1b3sn 
sn xn 
2 
c3 xn 
3 
sn xn 
3kx3; 
4 
where the state variables (x1, x2 and x3) represent the abundances of the three gene 
products, the auto-activation parameters a1, b2, c3 and the mutual-inhibition 
parameters a2, a3, b1, b3, c1, c2 are all experimentally accessible. To be concrete, 
initially all the auto activation and mutual inhibition parameters are set to be 1.0 
and 0.1, respectively, and k (the degradation rate) can be conveniently set to unity. 
The parameters in the Hill function are n 4 and s 0.5. There are altogether eight 
attractors in this system, as shown in Fig. 7b, which are distributed symmetrically 
in the three-dimensional state space. For example, attractor H has relatively high 
values for all three dynamical variables, and attractor B exhibits the opposite case 
with low abundances. For attractors A, C and F, one of the three state variables is 
high and the other two are low. For attractors D, E and G, one of the three state 
variables is low but the other two are high. 
From numerical simulations, we ﬁnd that the features of control are essentially 
the same as those for the two-node GRN system, in terms of characteristics such as 
the existence of critical control strength and the power-law scaling behaviour of the 
minimum control time (see Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Notes 7 and 
8 for details). We construct the attractor network in Fig. 7c through combinations of 
all eight attractors (as nodes) and directed elementary controls (as weighted directed 
edges). Information in Supplementary Table 3 can also be used to estimate the 
respective weights of the edges. From the attractor network, for any given pair of 
initial and ﬁnal states, we can identify all the viable control paths. Furthermore, the 
weighted-shortest path can be calculated once the edge weights are determined. 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
>=120 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 
1.61.2 
0.8 
0.4 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.6 
1.20.80.4 
a1= 1.3 
cd 
ab 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
80 
60 
40 
20 
00 
00.510 
0.5 
1 
0.510 
0.5 
1 
x1 
x2 
x1 
x2 
A’ 
B’ 
A 
C 
B 
E~ 
E~ 
E~ 
a1=1.5 
a1=1.3 
a1=1.1 
a1=0.9 
 = 0.02 
 = 0.1 
 = 0.02 
 = 0.03 
 = 0.05 
x2 
x1 
x2 
x1 
Figure 6 | Illustration of pseudo potential landscape. Pseudo potential ~E of the two-node GRN system (a) for a1 1.0 (DdE0.3549), s 0.05 and (b) 
for a1 1.3 (DdE0.0549), s 0.05. Regions of warm and cold colours indicate the states with large and small pseudo energies, respectively. (c) For ﬁxed 
s 0.02, two-dimensional representation of ~E for a number of values of a1.(d) For ﬁxed a1 1.3, two-dimensional representation of ~E for a number of 
values of s. 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
9 

/*** End Page =8= ***/
/*** Page =9= ***/
We note that, typically, the attractor network based on elementary control is not 
an all-to-all directed network so that certain control paths are absent, for example, 
from attractor H to B. Therefore, we need to extend the control method to a 
combination of multiple parameters. From Fig. 7c, we note that attractor H has 
incoming links only, whereas B has outgoing links only. The structure of the 
attractor network thus indicates that full control can be achieved (that is, to drive 
the system from any initial attractor to any ﬁnal attractor) if we can build a directed 
path from H to B. Since attractors B and H have low and high abundance, 
respectively, in the phase space, we modify the three auto-activation parameters 
simultaneously to steel the system from H to B. We ﬁnd that the relationship 
between control strength and minimal control time also follows the power law 
scaling with the scaling parameters mcE0.7973, aE1.26 and bE 0.77. In fact, 
when all the auto-activation strengths are smaller than mc, the system has one 
attractor only: B, meaning that perturbation based on parameter combinations can 
be used to realize the control from other attractors as well, that is, from one of the 
attractors A, C, D, E, F and G to attractor B. 
Pseudo potential landscape. For a dissipative, nonlinear dynamical system 
subject to noise, we can construct a pseudo potential landscape based on the state 
probability distribution. Assume that, asymptotically, the system approaches a 
stationary distribution. For a canonical dynamical system, the potential can be 
deﬁned as E(x) logP(x), where P(x) is the probability density function. For a 
conservative dynamical system, the direction of system evolution is nothing but the 
direction of the gradient of the potential function. However, this does not hold for 
dissipative dynamical systems. The potential function thus does not have the same 
physical meaning as that for a conservative system, henceforth, the term pseudo 
potential. This approach can be adopted to GRNs. 
To obtain the stationary distribution, we use the modiﬁed weighted-ensemble 
algorithm57, which offers faster convergence than, for example, the traditional 
random walk method. To be illustrative, we take the two-node GRN system 
(equation (3)) as an example to demonstrate how the pseudo potential landscape 
can be numerically constructed. The state space of the two-dimensional dynamical 
system is partitioned into an M M lattice with reﬂective boundaries conditions. 
Initially, the probability Pm,n(t) of all gird points are set to be uniform. The 
simulation time is divided into T steps, where each step has the duration Dt. At the 
beginning of each step t, there are N walkers randomly distributed at the grid point 
(m, n), which carry equal weight Pm,n(t)/N and perform random walk under the 
system dynamics and noise. The locations of these walkers in the grid are recorded 
at the end of each time step, and the probability at the next time step, Pm,n(t 1), is 
the summation of the probabilities carried by all the walkers at time t. At time 
(t 1), N new walkers carrying the updated probability at each grid point perform 
random walk again on the grid. This procedure repeats until the probability 
distribution becomes stationary, say Pm,n, which gives the pseudo potential 
landscape as ~ 
Em 
; n log Pm;n . Numerically, the time evolution of all walkers 
can be simulated using the second-order Heun method for integrating stochastic 
differential equations. For Fig. 6, the state space is divided into a 500 500 grid. At 
each grid point, there are N 20 walkers, each evolving T 2,000 time steps with 
Dt104. 
Instead of calculating the stationary probability distribution density, an 
alternative approach to constructing the potential landscape is the Freidlin and 
Wentzel s large deviation theory69. According to this theory, ﬁrst, one maps the 
stochastic dissipative system of interest to a Hamiltonian system70. One then 
estimates the transition rate from an attractor to a saddle point as rBexp( S0/s), 
where s is the noise amplitude and S0( ) characterizes the action functional 
associated with the optimal energy path, which can be numerically solved through 
an unconstrained nonlinear optimization method51,55. As this theory relies on 
solving a nonlinear optimization problem, in order to visualize the energy 
landscape, it is necessary to use a large number of state values x and solve the 
optimization problem for each, which is computationally exhaustive. We ﬁnd that, 
to capture the essential features of the energy landscape, it sufﬁces to use the 
stationary distribution method. 
In the weak noise limit s-0, according to the theory, to the leading order, 
the transition rate r from one ﬁxed point to a nearby saddle point xsp can be 
approximated as rBexp[( S0/(xsp)]. The minimum control time satisﬁes 
tm r 1, so we have tm exp S0 xsp . From equation (2), we obtain 
De expS0 xsp=b; 
indicating that the exceeded value De of the control parameter m is exponentially 
related to the optimal energy S0 associated with the path between the initial state 
and the nearby saddle point in the potential landscape. 
References 
1. Liu, Y.-Y., Slotine, J.-J. & Baraba 
´si, A.-L. Controllability of complex networks. 
Nature 473, 167–173 (2011). 
2. Yuan, Z.-Z., Zhao, C., Di, Z.-R., Wang, W.-X. & Lai, Y.-C. Exact controllability 
of complex networks. Nat. Commun 4, 2447 (2013). 
3. Wang, W.-X., Ni, X., Lai, Y.-C. & Grebogi, C. Optimizing controllability of 
complex networks by small structural perturbations. Phys. Rev. E 85, 026115 
(2011). 
4. Yan, G., Ren, J., Lai, Y.-C., Lai, C.-H. & Li, B. Controlling complex networks: 
How much energy is needed? Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 218703 (2012). 
5. Nepusz, T. & Vicsek, T. Controlling edge dynamics in complex networks. Nat. 
Phys 8, 568–573 (2012). 
6. Menichetti, G., DallAsta, L. & Bianconi, G. Network controllability is 
determined by the density of low in-degree and out-degree nodes. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 113, 078701 (2014). 
7. Ruths, J. & Ruths, D. Control proﬁles of complex networks. Science 343, 
1373–1376 (2014). 
8. Wuchty, S. Controllability in protein interaction networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 111, 7156–7160 (2014). 
9. Whalen, A. J., Brennan, S. N., Sauer, T. D. & Schiff, S. J. Observability and 
controllability of nonlinear networks: the role of symmetry. Phys. Rev. X 5, 
011005 (2015). 
10. Kalman, R. E. Mathematical description of linear dynamical systems. J. Soc. 
Indus. Appl. Math. Ser. A 1, 152–192 (1963). 
11. Slotine, J.-J. E. & Li, W. Applied Nonlinear Control (Prentice-Hall, 1991). 
12. Li, X., Wang, X. F. & Chen, G. Pinning a complex dynamical network to its 
equilibrium. IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. I 51, 2074–2087 (2004). 
13. Chen, Y.-Z., Huang, Z.-G. & Lai, Y.-C. Controlling extreme events on complex 
networks. Sci. Rep 4, 6121 (2014). 
14. McDonald, S. W., Grebogi, C., Ott, E. & Yorke, J. A. Fractal basin boundaries. 
Phys. D 17, 125–153 (1985). 
15. Feudel, U. & Grebogi, C. Why are chaotic attractors rare in multistable 
systems? Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 134102 (2003). 
16. Lai, Y.-C. & Te 
´l, T. Transient Chaos - Complex Dynamics on Finite-Time Scales 
1st edn (Springer, 2011). 
17. Huang, S. Genetic and non-genetic instability in tumor progression: link 
between the ﬁtness landscape and the epigenetic landscape of cancer cells. 
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 32, 423–448 (2013). 
abc 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
A 
EF 
HG 
D 
B 
C 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 
1.510.500 
1.5 
1 
0.5 X1 
X3 
X2 
Inhibition 
Activation 
Strength 
c1 
c3 
c2 
b1 
b2 
b3 
a3 
X2 
X3 
X1 
a1 
a2 
Figure 7 | A GRN of three nodes and its attractor network. (a) Schematic illustration of a three-node GRN system. The arrowhead and bar-head edges 
represent activation and inhibitory regulations, respectively. The sawtooth lines specify that the corresponding edge strength is experimentally adjustable. 
(b) Coexisting attractors (A to H) in the phase space. (c) The underlying attractor network, where each node represents an attractor and each weighted 
directed link indicates that its strength can be experimentally tuned to steer the system from the starting attractor to the pointed attractor. Each grey 
directed link with a single arrow indicates that only one parameter is needed to achieve control, and each purple link with a double-arrow and the label 3 
represent the case where three parameters are required to achieve control. 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
10 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 

/*** End Page =9= ***/
/*** Page =10= ***/
18. Su 
¨ el, G. M., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., Liberman, L. M. & Elowitz, M. B. An excitable 
gene regulatory circuit induces transient cellular differentiation. Nature 440, 
545–550 (2006). 
19. Huang, S., Eichler, G., Bar-Yam, Y. & Ingber, D. E. Cell fates as high- 
dimensional attractor states of a complex gene regulatory network. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 94, 128701 (2005). 
20. Furusawa, C. & Kaneko, K. A dynamical-systems view of stem cell biology. 
Science 338, 215–217 (2012). 
21. Li, X., Zhang, K. & Wang, J. Exploring the mechanisms of differentiation, 
dedifferentiation, reprogramming and transdifferentiation. PLoS ONE 9, 
e105216 (2014). 
22. Yao, G., Tan, C., West, M., Nevins, J. & You, L. Origin of bistability underlying 
mammalian cell cycle entry. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 485 (2011). 
23. Battogtokh, D. & Tyson, J. J. Bifurcation analysis of a model of the budding 
yeast cell cycle. Chaos 14, 653–661 (2004). 
24. Kauffman, S., Peterson, C., Samuelsson, B. & Troein, C. Genetic networks with 
canalyzing Boolean rules are always stable. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 
17102–17107 (2004). 
25. Greil, F. & Drossel, B. Dynamics of critical Kauffman networks under 
asynchronous stochastic update. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 048701 (2005). 
26. Ma, W., Trusina, A., El-Samad, H., Lim, W. A. & Tang, C. Deﬁning network 
topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation. Cell 138, 760–773 (2009). 
27. Faucon, P. C. et al. Gene networks of fully connected triads with complete auto- 
activation enable multistability and stepwise stochastic transitions. PLoS ONE 
9, e102873 (2014). 
28. Gardner, T. S., Cantor, C. R. & Collins, J. J. Construction of a genetic toggle 
switch in Escherichia coli. Nature 403, 339–342 (2000). 
29. Wu, M. et al. Engineering of regulated stochastic cell fate determination. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 10610–10615 (2013). 
30. Lai, Y.-C. Controlling complex, nonlinear dynamical networks. Nat. Sci. Rev 1, 
339–341 (2014). 
31. Feala, J. D. et al. Systems approaches and algorithms for discovery of combinatorial 
therapies. WileyInterdiscip.Rev.Syst.Biol.Med.2, 181–193 (2010). 
32. Fitzgerald, J. B., Schoeberl, B., Nielsen, U. B. & Sorger, P. K. Systems biology 
and combination therapy in the quest for clinical efﬁcacy. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2, 
458–466 (2006). 
33. Ellis, T., Wang, X. & Collins, J. J. Diversity-based, model-guided construction 
of synthetic gene networks with predicted functions. Nature Biotechnol. 27, 
465–471 (2009). 
34. Zhang, R. et al. Network model of survival signaling in large granular 
lymphocyte leukemia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16308–16313 (2008). 
35. Saadatpour, A. et al. Dynamical and structural analysis of a T-cell survival 
network identiﬁes novel candidate therapeutic targets for large granular 
lymphocyte leukemia. PloS Comp. Biol. 7, e1002267 (2011). 
36. Wittmann, D. M. et al. Transforming Boolean models to continuous models: 
methodology and application to T-cell receptor signaling. BMC Syst. Biol. 3, 98 
(2009). 
37. Krumsiek, J., Po 
¨lsterl, S., Wittmann, D. M. & Theis, F. J. Odefy-from discrete to 
continuous models. BMC Bioinformatcis 11, 233 (2010). 
38. Cornelius, S. P., Kath, W. L. & Motter, A. E. Realistic control of network 
dynamics. Nat. Commun 4, 1942 (2013). 
39. Benzi, R., Sutera, A. & Vulpiani, A. The mechanism of stochastic resonance. J. 
Phys. A 14, L453–L457 (1981). 
40. Gailey, P. C., Neiman, A., Collins, J. J. & Moss, F. Stochastic resonance in 
ensembles of nondynamical elements: The role of internal noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
79, 4701–4704 (1997). 
41. Pikovsky, A. S. & Kurths, J. Coherence resonance in a noise-driven excitable 
system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 775–778 (1997). 
42. Liu, Z. & Lai, Y.-C. Coherence resonance in coupled chaotic oscillators. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 86, 4737–4740 (2001). 
43. Wells, D. K., Kath, W. L. & Motter, A. E. Control of stochastic and induced 
switching in biophysical networks. Phys. Rev. X 5, 031036 (2015). 
44. Ott, E., Grebogi, C. & Yorke, J. A. Controlling chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 
1196–1199 (1990). 
45. Grebogi, C. & Lai, Y.-C. Controlling chaotic dynamical systems. Syst. Control 
Lett. 31, 307–312 (1997). 
46. Boccaletti, S., Grebogi, C., Lai, Y.-C., Mancini, H. & Maza, D. Control of chaos: 
theory and applications. Phys. Rep 329, 103–197 (2000). 
47. Sorrentino, F., di Bernardo, M., Garofalo, F. & Chen, G. Controllability of 
complex networks via pinning. Phys. Rev. E 75, 046103 (2007). 
48. Ott, E. Chaos in Dynamical Systems 2nd edn (Cambridge Univ., 2002). 
49. Menck, P. J., Heitzig, J., Kurths, J. & Schellnhuber, H. J. How dead ends 
undermine power grid stability. Nat. Commun. 5, 3969 (2014). 
50. Campbell, C. & Albert, R. Stabilization of perturbed Boolean network attractors 
through compensatory interactions. BMC Syst. Biol. 8, 53 (2014). 
51. Wang, P. et al. Epigenetic state network approach for describing cell phenotypic 
transitions. Interface Focus 4, 20130068 (2014). 
52. Dhooge, A., Govaerts, W. & Kuznetsov, Y. A. MATCONT: a MATLAB package 
for numerical bifurcation analysis of ODEs. ACM Trans. Math. Software 29, 
141–164 (2003). 
53. Huang, S., Guo, Y.-P., May, G. & Enver, T. Bifurcation dynamics in lineage- 
commitment in bipotent progenitor cells. Dev. Biol. 305, 695–713 (2007). 
54. Yin, N. et al. Synergistic and antagonistic drug combinations depend on 
network topology. PLoS ONE 9, e93960 (2014). 
55. Wang, J., Zhang, K., Xu, L. & Wang, E. Quantifying the Waddington landscape 
and biological paths for development and differentiation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 108, 8257–8262 (2011). 
56. Bhattacharya, S., Zhang, Q. & Andersen, M. E. A deterministic map of 
Waddington s epigenetic landscape for cell fate speciﬁcation. BMC Syst. Biol. 5, 
85 (2011). 
57. Kromer, J. A., Schimansky-Geier, L. & Toral, R. Weighted-ensemble Brownian 
dynamics simulation: Sampling of rare events in nonequilibrium systems. Phys. 
Rev. E 87, 063311 (2013). 
58. Waddington, C. H. The Strategy of the Genes (Allen & Unwin, 1957). 
59. MacArthur, B. D., Maayan, A. & Lemischka, I. R. Systems biology of stem cell 
fate and cellular reprogramming. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 672–681 (2009). 
60. Corson, F. & Siggia, E. D. Geometry, epistasis, and developmental patterning. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 5568–5575 (2012). 
61. McNamara, B. & Wiesenfeld, K. Theory of stochastic resonance. Phys. Rev. A 
39, 4854–4869 (1989). 
62. Gammaitoni, L., Ha 
¨nggi, P., Jung, P. & Marchesoni, F. Stochastic resonance. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 223–287 (1998). 
63. Wang, J., Xu, L. & Wang, E. K. Potential landscape and ﬂux framework 
of nonequilibrium networks: robustness, dissipation, and coherence of 
biochemical oscillations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 12271–12276 (2008). 
64. Zhang, F., Xu, L., Zhang, K., Wang, E. K. & Wang, J. The potential and ﬂux 
landscape theory of evolution. J. Chem. Phys. 137, 065102 (2012). 
65. Garham, R. & Te 
´l, T. Existence of a potential for dissipative dynamical systems. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 9–12 (1984). 
66.Graham,R. 
,Hamm,A.&Te 
´l, T. Nonequilibrium potentials for dynamical systems 
with fractal attractors and repellers. Phys.Rev.Lett.66, 3089–3092 (1991). 
67. Te 
´l, T. & Lai, Y.-C. Quasipotential approach to critical scaling in noise-induced 
chaos. Phys. Rev. E 81, 056208 (2010). 
68. Shu, J. et al. Induction of pluripotency in mouse somatic cells with lineage 
speciﬁers. Cell 153, 963–975 (2013). 
69. Freidlin, M. I., Szu 
¨ cs, J. & Wentzell, A. D. Random Perturbations of Dynamical 
Systems Vol. 260 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2012). 
70. Xing, J. & Kim, K. S. Application of the projection operator formalism to non- 
Hamiltonian dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 134, 044132 (2011). 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the ARO under Grant No. W911NF-14-1-0504. X.W. was 
supported by the NIH under Grant No. GM106081. 
Author contributions 
Devised the research project: Y.-C.L., X.W. and C.G.; performed numerical simulations: 
L.-Z.W. and R.-Q.S.; analysed the results: L.-Z.W., R.-Q.S., Z.-G.H., Y.-C.L. and W.-X.W.; 
wrote the paper: Y.-C.L., Z.-G.H., L.-Z.W. and R.-Q.S. 
Additional information 
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/ 
naturecommunications 
Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests. 
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/ 
reprintsandpermissions/ 
How to cite this article: Wang, L.-Z. et al. A geometrical approach to control and 
controllability of nonlinear dynamical networks. Nat. Commun. 7:11323 doi: 10.1038/ 
ncomms11323 (2016). 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise 
in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. 
To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 
ARTICLE 
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:11323 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11323 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 
11 

/*** End Page =10= ***/
